**Golf** is a club-and-ball [sport](sport "wikilink") in which players
use various [clubs](Golf_club "wikilink") to hit a
[ball](Golf_ball "wikilink") into a series of holes on a
[course](golf_course "wikilink") in as few strokes as possible.

Golf, unlike most [ball games](ball_game "wikilink"), cannot and does
not use a standardized playing area, and coping with the varied terrains
encountered on different courses is a key part of the game. Courses
typically have either 9 or 18
[*holes*](Glossary_of_golf#Hole "wikilink"), regions of terrain that
each contain a *cup*, the hole that receives the ball. Each hole on a
course contains a [teeing ground](teeing_ground "wikilink") to start
from, and a [putting green](putting_green "wikilink") containing the
cup. There are several standard forms of terrain between the tee and the
green, such as the fairway, rough (tall grass), and various
[*hazards*](Hazard_(golf) "wikilink") such as water, rocks, or
sand-filled [*bunkers*](Glossary_of_golf#Bunker "wikilink"). Each hole
on a course is unique in its specific layout.

Golf is played for the lowest number of strokes by an individual, known
as [stroke play](stroke_play "wikilink"), or the lowest score on the
most individual holes in a complete round by an individual or team,
known as [match play](match_play "wikilink"). Stroke play is the most
commonly seen format at all levels, especially at the elite level.

The modern game of golf [ originated](History_of_golf "wikilink") [in
15th century Scotland](Golf_in_Scotland "wikilink"). The 18-hole round
was created at the [Old Course](Old_Course_at_St_Andrews "wikilink") at
[St Andrews](St_Andrews "wikilink") in 1764. Golf's first
[major](Major_golf_championships "wikilink"), and the world's oldest
golf tournament, is [The Open
Championship](The_Open_Championship "wikilink"), also known as the
British Open, which was first played in 1860 at the [Prestwick Golf
Club](Prestwick_Golf_Club "wikilink") in Ayrshire, Scotland. This is one
of the four [major
championships](Men's_major_golf_championships "wikilink") in men's
professional golf, the other three being played in the United States:
[The Masters](The_Masters "wikilink"), the [U.S.
Open](U.S._Open_(golf) "wikilink"), and the [PGA
Championship](PGA_Championship "wikilink").

## Origin and history

[thumb\|upright=1.3\|The [Xuande Emperor](Xuande_Emperor "wikilink") of
the Ming dynasty playing
[chuiwan](chuiwan "wikilink")](File:Ming_Emperor_Xuande_playing_Golf.jpg "wikilink")
While the modern game of golf originated in 15th century
[Scotland](Scotland "wikilink"), the game's ancient origins are unclear
and much debated.

Some historians[^1] trace the sport back to the Roman game of
[paganica](wikt:paganica "wikilink"), in which participants used a bent
stick to hit a stuffed leather ball. One theory asserts that paganica
spread throughout Europe as the Romans conquered most of the continent,
during the first century BC, and eventually evolved into the modern
game.[^2]

Others cite [chuiwan](chuiwan "wikilink") (捶丸; "chui" means striking
and "wan" means small ball)[^3] as the progenitor, a
[Chinese](China "wikilink") game played between the eighth and
fourteenth centuries.[^4] A [Ming Dynasty](Ming_dynasty "wikilink")
scroll by the artist Youqiu dating back to 1368 entitled "The Autumn
Banquet" shows a member of the Chinese Imperial court swinging what
appears to be a golf club at a small ball with the aim of sinking it
into a hole.[^5] The game is thought to have been introduced into Europe
during the Middle Ages.[^6]

[thumb\|left\|upright=1.15\|*The MacDonald boys playing golf*,
attributed to William Mosman. 18th century, [National Galleries of
Scotland](National_Galleries_of_Scotland "wikilink").](File:The_MacDonald_boys_playing_golf.jpg "wikilink")
Another early game that resembled modern golf was known as
[cambuca](wikt:cambuca "wikilink") in England and chambot in France.[^7]
The Persian game [chowkan](chovgan "wikilink") is another possible
ancient origin, albeit being more [polo](polo "wikilink")-like. In
addition, [kolven](kolven "wikilink") (a game involving a ball and
curved bats) was played annually in Loenen, Netherlands, beginning in
1297, to commemorate the capture of the assassin of [Floris
V](Floris_V,_Count_of_Holland "wikilink"), a year earlier.

The modern game [originated in Scotland](Golf_in_Scotland "wikilink"),
where the first written record of golf is [James
II](James_II_of_Scotland "wikilink")'s banning of the game in 1457, as
an unwelcome distraction to learning archery.[^8] [James
IV](King_James_IV_of_Scotland "wikilink") lifted the ban in 1502 when he
became a golfer himself, with golf clubs first recorded in 1503–1504:
"For golf clubbes and balles to the King that he playit with".[^9] To
many golfers, the [Old Course](Old_Course_at_St_Andrews "wikilink") at
[St Andrews](St_Andrews "wikilink"), a [links
course](Links_(golf) "wikilink") dating to before 1574, is considered to
be a site of pilgrimage.[^10] In 1764, the standard 18-hole golf course
was created at St Andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18
holes.[^11] Golf is documented as being played on [Musselburgh
Links](Musselburgh_Links "wikilink"), East Lothian, Scotland as early as
2 March 1672, which is certified as the oldest golf course in the world
by *Guinness World Records*.[^12][^13] The oldest surviving [rules of
golf](rules_of_golf "wikilink") were compiled in March 1744 for the
Company of Gentlemen Golfers, later renamed [The Honourable Company of
Edinburgh
Golfers](The_Honourable_Company_of_Edinburgh_Golfers "wikilink"), which
was played at [Leith](Leith_Links "wikilink"), Scotland.[^14] The
world's oldest golf tournament in existence, and golf's first major, is
[The Open Championship](The_Open_Championship "wikilink"), which was
first played on 17 October 1860 at Prestwick Golf Club, in Ayrshire,
Scotland, with [Scottish golfers winning the earliest
majors](Men's_major_golf_championships#Major_championship_winners "wikilink").[^15]
Two Scotsmen from [Dunfermline](Dunfermline "wikilink"), John Reid and
Robert Lockhart, first demonstrated golf in the U.S. by setting up a
hole in an orchard in 1888, with Reid setting up America's first golf
club the same year, [Saint Andrew's Golf
Club](Saint_Andrew's_Golf_Club "wikilink") in Yonkers, New York.[^16]

## Golf course

![Aerial view of the *Golfplatz [Wittenbeck](Wittenbeck "wikilink")* in
[Mecklenburg](Mecklenburg "wikilink"),
[Germany](Germany "wikilink")](Golf_course_Golfplatz_Wittenbeck_Mecklenburg_Ostsee_Baltic_Sea_Germany.jpg "Aerial view of the Golfplatz Wittenbeck in Mecklenburg, Germany")
![The *Tammer Golf Course* in the [Ruotula
district](Subdivisions_of_Tampere "wikilink") of
[Tampere](Tampere "wikilink"),
Finland](Tammer-Golf.jpg "The Tammer Golf Course in the Ruotula district of Tampere, Finland")
A golf course consists of either 9 or 18 holes, each with a [teeing
ground](teeing_ground "wikilink") or "tee box" that is set off by two
markers showing the bounds of the legal tee area,
[fairway](Fairway_(golf)#Fairway_and_rough "wikilink"),
[rough](Fairway_(golf)#Fairway_and_rough "wikilink") and other
[hazards](Hazard_(golf) "wikilink"), and the [putting
green](putting_green "wikilink") surrounded by the fringe with the pin
(normally a flagstick) and cup.

The levels of grass are varied to increase difficulty, or to allow for
putting in the case of the green. While many holes are designed with a
direct line-of-sight from the teeing area to the green, some holes may
bend either to the left or to the right. This is commonly called a
"dogleg", in reference to a dog's knee. The hole is called a "dogleg
left" if the hole angles leftwards and "dogleg right" if it bends right.
Sometimes, a hole's direction may bend twice; this is called a "double
dogleg".

A regular golf course consists of 18 holes, but nine-hole courses are
common and can be played twice through for a full round of 18
holes.[^17][^18]

Early Scottish golf courses were primarily laid out on links land,
soil-covered sand dunes directly inland from beaches. The word "links"
derives from the Scots language and the Old English word *hlinc*
("rising ground, ridge"): traditionally these are coastal sand dunes but
sometimes open parkland.[^19] This gave rise to the term "golf links",
particularly applied to seaside courses and those built on naturally
sandy soil inland.[^20]

The first 18-hole golf course in the United States was on a sheep farm
in [Downers Grove, Illinois](Downers_Grove,_Illinois "wikilink"), in
1892. The course is still there today.[^21]

## Play of the game

![1=teeing ground, 2=water hazard, 3=rough, 4=[out of
bounds](out_of_bounds "wikilink"), 5=[sand
bunker](Hazard_(golf)#Bunker "wikilink"), 6=water hazard, 7=fairway,
8=putting green, 9=flagstick,
10=hole](Golf_field.svg "1=teeing ground, 2=water hazard, 3=rough, 4=out of bounds, 5=sand bunker, 6=water hazard, 7=fairway, 8=putting green, 9=flagstick, 10=hole")
Every round of golf is based on playing a number of holes in a given
order. A "round" typically consists of 18 holes that are played in the
order determined by the course layout. Each hole is played once in the
round on a standard course of 18 holes. The game can be played by any
number of people, although a typical group will have 1–4 people playing
the round. The typical amount of time required for pace of play is two
hours for a 9-hole round and four hours for an 18-hole round.

Playing a hole on a golf course is initiated by putting a ball into play
by striking it with a club on the [teeing
ground](teeing_ground "wikilink") (also called the tee box, or simply
the tee). For this first shot on each hole, it is allowed but not
required for the golfer to place the ball on a
[tee](Tee#Golf_tee "wikilink") prior to striking it. A tee is a small
peg that can be used to elevate the ball slightly above the ground up to
a few centimetres high. Tees are commonly made of wood but may be
constructed of any material, including plastic. Traditionally, golfers
used mounds of sand to elevate the ball, and containers of sand were
provided for the purpose. A few courses still require sand to be used
instead of peg tees, to reduce litter and reduce damage to the teeing
ground. Tees help reduce the interference of the ground or grass on the
movement of the club making the ball easier to hit, and also places the
ball in the very centre of the striking face of the club (the "sweet
spot") for better distance.

When the initial shot on a hole is intended to move the ball a long
distance, typically more than , the shot is commonly called a "drive"
and is generally made with a long-shafted, large-headed
[wood](wood_(golf) "wikilink") club called a "driver". Shorter holes may
be initiated with other clubs, such as higher-numbered woods or
[irons](Iron_(golf) "wikilink"). Once the ball comes to rest, the golfer
strikes it again as many times as necessary using shots that are
variously known as a "lay-up", an "approach", a "pitch", or a
"[chip](Golf_swing#Chip "wikilink")", until the ball reaches the green,
where the golfer then "[putts](Golf_swing#Putt "wikilink")" the ball
into the hole (commonly called "sinking the putt" or "holing out"). The
goal of getting the ball into the hole ("holing" the ball) in as few
strokes as possible may be impeded by obstacles such as areas of longer
grass called "rough" (usually found alongside fairways), which both
slows any ball that contacts it and makes it harder to advance a ball
that has stopped on it; "doglegs", which are changes in the direction of
the fairway that often require shorter shots to play around them;
[bunkers](Hazard_(golf)#Bunker "wikilink") (or sand traps); and [water
hazards](Hazard_(golf)#Water_hazard "wikilink") such as ponds or
streams.[^22]

In stroke play competitions each player plays their ball until it is
holed no matter how many strokes that may take. In match play it is
acceptable to simply pick up one's ball and "surrender the hole" after
enough strokes have been made by a player that it is mathematically
impossible for the player to win the hole. It is also acceptable in
informal stroke play to surrender the hole after hitting three strokes
more than the "par" rating of the hole (a "triple bogey" – see below);
while technically a violation of Rule 3–2, this practice speeds play as
a courtesy to others, and avoids "runaway scores" and excessive
frustration.

The total distance from the first teeing ground to the 18th green can be
quite long; total yardages "through the green" can be in excess of , and
when adding in the travel distance between the green of one hole and the
tee of the next, even skilled players may easily travel or more during a
round. At some courses, gas or electric [golf
carts](golf_carts "wikilink") are used to travel between shots, which
can speed-up play and allows participation by individuals unable to walk
a whole round. On other courses players generally walk the course,
either carrying their bag using a shoulder strap or using a "golf
trolley" for their bag. These trolleys may or may not be battery
assisted. At many amateur tournaments including U.S. high school and
college play, players are required to walk and to carry their own bags,
but at the professional and top amateur level, as well as at high-level
private clubs, players may be accompanied by
[caddies](caddies "wikilink"), who carry and manage the players'
equipment and who are allowed by the rules to give advice on the play of
the course.[^23]

## Rules and regulations

![[Arnold Palmer](Arnold_Palmer "wikilink") in
1953](ArnoldPalmerCoastGuard1953.jpg "Arnold Palmer in 1953") The rules
of golf are internationally standardised and are jointly governed by
[The R&A](The_R&A "wikilink"), spun off in 2004 from [The Royal and
Ancient Golf Club of St
Andrews](The_Royal_and_Ancient_Golf_Club_of_St_Andrews "wikilink")
(founded 1754), and the [United States Golf
Association](United_States_Golf_Association "wikilink")
(USGA).[^24][^25] With the aim of simplifying the rules, in 2017 the
USGA and R&A undertook a complete rewrite.[^26] The new rule book came
into effect in January 2019.[^27]

The underlying principle of the rules is fairness. As stated on the back
cover of the official rule book:

  
*Play the ball as it lies, play the course as you find it, and if you
cannot do either, do what is fair.*

There are strict regulations regarding the amateur status of
golfers.[^28] Essentially, anybody who has ever received payment or
compensation for giving instruction, or played golf for money, is not
considered an amateur and may not participate in competitions limited
solely to amateurs. However, amateur golfers may receive expenses that
comply with strict guidelines and they may accept non-cash prizes within
the limits established by the Rules of Amateur Status.

In addition to the officially printed rules, golfers also abide by a set
of guidelines called [golf etiquette](golf_etiquette "wikilink").
Etiquette guidelines cover matters such as safety, fairness, pace of
play, and a player's obligation to contribute to the care of the course.
Though there are no penalties for breach of etiquette rules, players
generally follow the rules of golf etiquette in an effort to improve
everyone's playing experience.

### Penalties

Penalty strokes are incurred in certain situations and are counted
towards a player's score as if there were extra swing(s) at the ball.
Either one or two strokes are added for most rule infractions or for
taking relief from various situations, with the "general penalty"
defined as two-strokes, and disqualification for severe or repeated rule
breaches. Examples include:

-   A lost ball or a ball hit out of bounds (OB) results in a penalty of
    one stroke and distance (Rule 18.2).
-   With the exception of certain circumstances, a one-stroke penalty is
    assessed if a player causes their ball to move (Rule 9.4).
-   A one-stroke penalty is assessed if a player elects to take relief
    when their ball comes to rest within a red or yellow penalty area
    (Rule 17), or from an unplayable lie (Rule 19).
-   A two-stroke penalty is incurred for making a stroke at the wrong
    ball (Rule 6.3c).
-   A two-stroke penalty is incurred for hitting a fellow player's ball
    if both balls lay on the green prior to the stroke (Rule 11.1a).
-   Disqualification can result from cheating, signing for a lower
    score, or failing to adhere to one or more rules that lead to
    improper play.[^29]

## Equipment

![A [wood](Wood_(golf) "wikilink") positioned ready to be swung and to
strike a [golf
ball](golf_ball "wikilink")](Golf_ball_resting_near_fairway_wood.jpg "A wood positioned ready to be swung and to strike a golf ball")
[Golf clubs](Golf_club "wikilink") are used to hit a [golf
ball](golf_ball "wikilink"). Each club is composed of a shaft with a
lance (or "grip") on the top end and a club head on the bottom. Long
clubs, which have a lower amount of degree loft, are those meant to
propel the ball a comparatively longer distance, and short clubs a
higher degree of loft and a comparatively shorter distance. The actual
physical length of each club is longer or shorter, depending on the
distance the club is intended to propel the ball.

Golf clubs have traditionally been arranged into three basic types.
[Woods](Wood_(golf) "wikilink") are large-headed, long-shafted clubs
meant to propel the ball a long distance from relatively "open" lies,
such as the teeing ground and fairway. Of particular importance is the
*driver* or "1-wood", which is the lowest lofted wood club, and in
modern times has become highly specialized for making extremely
long-distance tee shots, up to , or more, in a professional golfer's
hands. Traditionally these clubs had heads made of a hardwood, hence the
name, but virtually all modern woods are now made of metal such as
titanium, or of composite materials.
[Irons](Iron_(golf_club) "wikilink") are shorter-shafted clubs with a
metal head primarily consisting of a flat, angled striking face.
Traditionally the clubhead was forged from iron; modern iron clubheads
are investment-cast from a steel alloy. Irons of varying loft are used
for a variety of shots from virtually anywhere on the course, but most
often for shorter-distance shots approaching the green, or to get the
ball out of tricky lies such as sand traps. The third class is the
[putter](putter "wikilink"), which evolved from the irons to create a
low-lofted, balanced club designed to roll the ball along the green and
into the hole. Putters are virtually always used on the green or in the
surrounding rough/fringe. A fourth class, called
[hybrids](hybrid_(golf) "wikilink"), evolved as a cross between woods
and irons, and are typically seen replacing the low-lofted irons with a
club that provides similar distance, but a higher launch angle and a
more forgiving nature.

A maximum of 14 clubs is allowed in a player's bag at one time during a
stipulated round. The choice of clubs is at the golfer's discretion,
although every club must be constructed in accordance with parameters
outlined in the rules. (Clubs that meet these parameters are usually
called "conforming".) Violation of these rules can result in
disqualification.

The exact shot hit at any given time on a golf course, and which club is
used to accomplish the shot, are always completely at the discretion of
the golfer; in other words, there is no restriction whatsoever on which
club a golfer may or may not use at any time for any shot.

[Golf balls](Golf_ball "wikilink") are spherical, usually white
(although other colours are allowed), and minutely pock-marked by
dimples that decrease aerodynamic drag by increasing air turbulence
around the ball in motion, which delays "boundary layer" separation and
reduces the drag-inducing "wake" behind the ball, thereby allowing the
ball to fly farther.[^30] The combination of a soft "boundary layer" and
a hard "core" enables both distance and spin.

A [tee](Tee#Golf_tee "wikilink") is allowed only for the first stroke on
each hole, unless the player must hit a provisional tee shot or replay
their first shot from the tee.

Many golfers wear [golf shoes](Golf_equipment#Shoes "wikilink") with
metal or plastic spikes designed to increase traction, thus allowing for
longer and more accurate shots.

A [golf bag](golf_bag "wikilink") is used to transport golf clubs and
the player's other or personal equipment. Golf bags have several pockets
designed for carrying equipment and supplies such as tees, balls, and
gloves. Golf bags can be carried, pulled on a trolley or harnessed to a
motorized [golf cart](golf_cart "wikilink") during play. Golf bags
usually have both a hand strap and shoulder strap for carrying, others
may be carried over both shoulders like a backpack, and often bags have
retractable legs that allow the bag to stand upright when at rest.

## Stroke mechanics

![A golfer takes an approach shot on the
fairway.](Lady_golfer.jpg "A golfer takes an approach shot on the fairway.")

The golf swing is outwardly similar to many other motions involving
swinging a tool or playing implement, such as an axe or a baseball bat.
However, unlike many of these motions, the result of the swing is highly
dependent on several sub-motions being properly aligned and timed. These
ensure that the club travels up to the ball in line with the desired
path; that the clubface is in line with the swing path; and that the
ball hits the centre or "sweet spot" of the clubface. The ability to do
this consistently, across a complete set of clubs with a wide range of
shaft lengths and clubface areas, is a key skill for any golfer, and
takes a significant effort to achieve.

### Stance

Stance refers to how the golfer positions themselves in order to play a
stroke; it is fundamentally important in being able to play a stroke
effectively. The stance adopted is determined by what stroke is being
played. All stances involve a slight crouch. This allows for a more
efficient striking posture whilst also [isometrically
preloading](Isometric_exercise#Isometric_presses_as_preparation_for_explosive_power_movements "wikilink")
the muscles of the legs and core; this allows the stroke to be played
more dynamically and with a greater level of overall control. When
adopting their stance golfers start with the non-dominant side of the
body facing the target (for a right-hander, the target is to their
left). Setting the stance in regard to the position of the ball, and
placing the clubhead behind the ball, is known as being at address; when
in this position the player's body and the centerline of the club face
are positioned parallel to the desired line of travel, with the feet
either perpendicular to that line or slightly splayed outward. The feet
are commonly shoulder-width apart for middle irons and putters, narrower
for short irons and wider for long irons and woods. The ball is
typically positioned more to the "front" of the player's stance (closer
to the leading foot) for lower-lofted clubs, with the usual ball
position for a drive being just behind the arch of the leading foot. The
ball is placed further "back" in the player's stance (toward the
trailing foot) as the loft of the club to be used increases. Most iron
shots and putts are made with the ball roughly centered in the stance,
while a few mid- and short-iron shots are made with the ball slightly
behind the centre of the stance to ensure consistent contact between the
ball and clubface, so the ball is on its way before the club continues
down into the turf.

### Strokes

The golfer chooses a golf club, grip, and stroke appropriate to the
distance:

-   The "drive" or "full swing" is used on the teeing ground and
    fairway, typically with a wood or long iron, to produce the maximum
    distance capable with the club. In the extreme, the windup can end
    with the shaft of the club parallel to the ground above the player's
    shoulders.
-   The "approach" or "3/4 swing" is used in medium- and long-distance
    situations where an exact distance and good accuracy is preferable
    to maximum possible distance, such as to place the ball on the green
    or "lay up" in front of a hazard. The windup or "backswing" of such
    a shot typically ends up with the shaft of the club pointing
    straight upwards or slightly towards the player.
-   The "chip" or "half-swing" is used for relatively short-distance
    shots near the green, with high-lofted irons and wedges. The goal of
    the chip is to land the ball safely on the green, allowing it to
    roll out towards the hole. It can also be used from other places to
    accurately position the ball into a more advantageous lie. The
    backswing typically ends with the head of the club between hip and
    head height.
-   The "putt" is used in short-distance shots on or near the green,
    typically made with the eponymous "putter", although similar strokes
    can be made with medium to high-numbered irons to carry a short
    distance in the air and then roll (a "bump and run"). The backswing
    and follow-through of the putt are both abbreviated compared to
    other strokes, with the head of the club rarely rising above the
    knee. The goal of the putt is usually to put the ball in the hole,
    although a long-distance putt may be called a "lag" and is made with
    the primary intention of simply closing distance to the hole or
    otherwise placing the ball advantageously.

Having chosen a club and stroke to produce the desired distance, the
player addresses the ball by taking their stance to the side of it and
(except when the ball lies in a hazard) grounding the club behind the
ball. The golfer then takes their backswing, rotating the club, their
arms and their upper body away from the ball, and then begins their
swing, bringing the clubhead back down and around to hit the ball. A
proper golf swing is a complex combination of motions, and slight
variations in posture or positioning can make a great deal of difference
in how well the ball is hit and how straight it travels. The general
goal of a player making a full swing is to propel the clubhead as fast
as possible while maintaining a single "plane" of motion of the club and
clubhead, to send the clubhead into the ball along the desired path of
travel and with the clubhead also pointing that direction.

Accuracy and consistency are typically stressed over pure distance. A
player with a straight drive that travels only will nevertheless be able
to accurately place the ball into a favourable lie on the fairway, and
can make up for the lesser distance of any given club by simply using
"more club" (a lower loft) on their tee shot or on subsequent fairway
and approach shots. However, a golfer with a drive that may go but often
does not fly straight will be less able to position their ball
advantageously; the ball may "hook", "pull", "draw", "fade", "push" or
"slice" off the intended line and land out of bounds or in the rough or
hazards, and thus the player will require many more strokes to hole out.

### Musculature

A golf stroke uses the muscles of the [core](Core_(anatomy) "wikilink")
(especially [erector spinae muscles](erector_spinae_muscles "wikilink")
and [latissimus dorsi muscle](latissimus_dorsi_muscle "wikilink") when
turning), [hamstring](hamstring "wikilink"),
[shoulder](shoulder "wikilink"), and [wrist](wrist "wikilink"). Stronger
muscles in the wrist can prevent them from being twisted during swings,
whilst stronger shoulders increase the turning force. Weak wrists can
also transmit the force to elbows and even neck and lead to injury.
(When a muscle contracts, it pulls equally from both ends and, to have
movement at only one end of the muscle, other muscles must come into
play to stabilize the bone to which the other end of the muscle is
attached.) Golf is a unilateral exercise that can break body balances,
requiring exercises to keep the balance in muscles.[^31][^32]

### Types of putting

Putting is considered to be the most important component of the game of
golf. As the game of golf has evolved, there have been many different
putting techniques and grips that have been devised to give golfers the
best chance to make putts. When the game originated, golfers would putt
with their dominant hand on the bottom of the grip and their weak hand
on top of the grip. This grip and putting style is known as
"conventional". There are many variations of conventional including
overlap, where the golfer overlaps the off hand index finger onto off
the dominant pinky; interlock, where the offhand index finger interlocks
with the dominant pinky and ring finger; double or triple overlap and so
on.[^33] Recently, "cross handed" putting has become a popular trend
amongst professional golfers and amateurs. Cross handed putting is the
idea that the dominant hand is on top of the grip where the weak hand is
on the bottom. This grip restricts the motion in your dominant hand and
eliminates the possibility of wrist breakdowns through the putting
stroke.[^34]

Other notable putting styles include "the claw", a style that has the
grip directly in between the thumb and index finger of the dominant hand
while the palm faces the target.[^35] The weak hand placed normally on
the putter. Anchored putting, a style that requires a longer putter
shaft that can be anchored into the player's stomach or below the chin;
the idea is to stabilize one end of the putter thus creating a more
consistent pendulum stroke. This style has been banned on professional
circuits since 2016.[^36]

## Scoring and handicapping

### Par

![A par-3 hole in Phoenician Golf Club,
[Scottsdale](Scottsdale,_Arizona "wikilink"),
[Arizona](Arizona "wikilink")](The_Phoenician-Canyon.jpg "A par-3 hole in Phoenician Golf Club, Scottsdale, Arizona")
![A marker stone indicating that this hole is a par-5
hole](Grand_Cypress_New_Course_15th_hole.jpg "A marker stone indicating that this hole is a par-5 hole")
A hole is classified by its par, which gives an indication of the number
of strokes a skilled golfer may be expected to need to complete play of
the hole.[^37] The primary factor for classifying the par of a
relatively straight, hazard-free hole is the distance from the tee to
the green, and calculates the number of strokes a skilled golfer is
expected to require to reach the [green](Putting_green "wikilink") with
an additional allowance of 2 putts. As such, the minimum par of any hole
is 3; one stroke for the tee shot and two putts. Par 3, 4 and 5 holes
are commonplace on golf courses; far more rarely, courses may feature
par-6 and even par-7 holes.

For men, a typical par-3 hole is less than in length, with a par-4 hole
ranging between , and a par-5 hole being longer than ; for women these
boundaries are lower, and for professionals they are much increased. The
rare par-6s can stretch well over . These distances are based on the
typical scratch golfer's drive distance of between . Although length is
the primary factor in calculating par, other factors are taken into
account; however the number of strokes a scratch golfer should take to
make the green remains foremost. Factors affecting the calculation
include altitude, gradient of the land from the tee to green, and forced
"[lay-ups](Glossary_of_golf#Lay-up "wikilink")" due to dog-legs (sharp
bends) or obstacles (e.g. bunkers, water hazards).[^38]

Getting the ball onto the green in two strokes less than par, and hence
meeting the par calculation criteria, is called making "green in
regulation" or GIR.[^39] Missing a GIR does not necessarily mean a
golfer will not make par, but it does make doing so more difficult as it
reduces the number of putts available; conversely, making a GIR does not
guarantee a par, as the player might require three or more putts to
"hole out". Professional golfers typically make between 60% and 70% of
greens in regulation.[^40]

Eighteen-hole courses typically total to an overall par score of 70 to
72 for a complete round; with most holes having a par of 4, and a
smaller number of par-3 and par-5 holes. Additionally, courses may be
classified according to their play difficulty, which may be used to
calculate a golfer's [handicap](Handicap_(golf) "wikilink").[^41] The
two primary difficulty ratings in the U.S. are the Course Rating, which
is the expected score for a zero-handicap "scratch golfer", and the
Slope Rating, which is a measure of how much worse a "bogey golfer"
(handicap around 20) would be expected to play than a "scratch golfer"
relative to their handicap.

#### Scoring

![Golf-themed decorative [nest box](nest_box "wikilink") "Birdies
Welcome"](Nest_box_“Birdies_Welcome”.jpg "Golf-themed decorative nest box "Birdies Welcome"")
The goal is to play as few strokes per round as possible. A golfer's
number of strokes in a hole, course, or tournament is compared to its
respective par score, and is then reported either as the number that the
golfer was "under-" or "over-par", or if it was "equal to par". A [hole
in one](hole_in_one "wikilink") (or an "ace") occurs when a golfer sinks
their ball into the cup with their first stroke from the tee. Common
scores for a hole also have specific terms.[^42]

| Numeric term | Name                          | Definition              |
|--------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------|
| −4           | Condor                        | four strokes under par  |
| −3           | Albatross (Double eagle)      | three strokes under par |
| −2           | Eagle                         | two strokes under par   |
| −1           | Birdie                        | one stroke under par    |
| E            | [Par](Par_(score) "wikilink") | equal to par            |
| +1           | Bogey                         | one stroke over par     |
| +2           | Double bogey                  | two strokes over par    |
| +3           | Triple bogey                  | three strokes over par  |

In a typical professional tournament or among "scratch" amateur players,
"birdie-bogey" play is common; a player will "lose" a stroke by bogeying
a hole, then "gain" one by scoring a birdie. Eagles are uncommon but not
rare; however, only [18 players have scored an
albatross](List_of_albatrosses_in_important_tournaments#Major_championships "wikilink")
in a men's major championship. One of the rarest feats in golf is the
condor, which has never occurred in a professional tournament. Only five
condors have been verified to have ever occurred, although none of the
courses involved were professionally accredited.[^43]

### Basic forms of golf

There are two basic forms of golf play, match play and stroke play.
Stroke play is more popular.

#### Match play

Two players (or two teams) play each hole as a separate contest against
each other in what is called [match play](match_play "wikilink"). The
party with the lower score wins that hole, or if the scores of both
players or teams are equal the hole is "halved" (or tied). The game is
won by the party that wins more holes than the other. In the case that
one team or player has taken a lead that cannot be overcome in the
number of holes remaining to be played, the match is deemed to be won by
the party in the lead, and the remainder of the holes are not played.
For example, if one party already has a lead of six holes, and only five
holes remain to be played on the course, the match is over and the
winning party is deemed to have won "6 & 5". At any given point, if the
lead is equal to the number of holes remaining, the party leading the
match is said to be "dormie", and the match is continued until the party
increases the lead by one hole or ties any of the remaining holes,
thereby winning the match, or until the match ends in a tie with the
lead player's opponent winning all remaining holes. When the game is
tied after the predetermined number of holes have been played, it may be
continued until one side takes a one-hole lead.[^44]

#### Stroke play

The score achieved for each and every hole of the round or tournament is
added to produce the total score, and the player with the lowest score
wins in [stroke play](stroke_play "wikilink"). Stroke play is the game
most commonly played by professional golfers. If there is a tie after
the regulation number of holes in a professional tournament, a playoff
takes place between all tied players. Playoffs either are sudden death
or employ a pre-determined number of holes, anywhere from three to a
full 18. In sudden death, a player who scores lower on a hole than all
of their opponents wins the match. If at least two players remain tied
after such a playoff using a pre-determined number of holes, then play
continues in sudden death format, where the first player to win a hole
wins the tournament.

### Other formats of play

There are many variations in scoring and playing formats in the game of
golf, some officially defined in the Rules of Golf. Variations include
the popular Stableford scoring system, and various team formats. Some
common and popular examples are listed below.

There are also variations on the usual starting procedure where everyone
begins from the first tee and plays all holes in order, through to the
eighteenth. In large field tournaments, especially on professional
tours, a two tee start is commonplace, where the field will be split
between starting on the first tee and the tenth tee (sometimes the
eighth or eleventh depending on proximity to the clubhouse). [Shotgun
starts](Shotgun_start "wikilink") are mainly used for amateur tournament
or society play. In this variant, each of the groups playing starts
their game on a different hole, allowing for all players to start and
end their round at roughly the same time. For example, a group starting
on hole 5 will play through to the 18th hole and continue with hole 1,
ending their round on hole 4.

#### Bogey or par competition

A bogey or par competition is a scoring format sometimes seen in
informal tournaments. Its scoring is similar to match play, except each
player compares their hole score to the hole's par rating instead of the
score of another player. The player "wins" the hole if they score a
birdie or better, they "lose" the hole if they score a bogey or worse,
and they "halve" the hole by scoring par. By recording only this simple
win–loss–halve score on the sheet, a player can shrug off a very
poorly-played hole with a simple "-" mark and move on. As used in
competitions, the player or pair with the best win–loss differential
wins the competition.

#### Stableford

The [Stableford](Stableford "wikilink") system is a simplification of
stroke play that awards players points based on their score relative to
the hole's par; the score for a hole is calculated by taking the par
score, adding 2, then subtracting the player's hole score, making the
result zero if negative. Alternately stated, a double bogey or worse is
zero points, a bogey is worth one point, par is two, a birdie three, an
eagle four, and so on. The advantages of this system over stroke play
are a more natural "higher is better" scoring, the ability to compare
Stableford scores between plays on courses with different total par
scores (scoring an "even" in stroke play will always give a Stableford
score of 36), discouraging the tendency to abandon the entire game after
playing a particularly bad hole (a novice playing by strict rules may
score as high as an 8 or 10 on a single difficult hole; their Stableford
score for the hole would be zero, which puts them only two points behind
par no matter how badly they played), and the ability to simply pick up
one's ball once it is impossible to score any points for the hole, which
speeds play.

The USGA and R&A sanction a "Modified Stableford" system for scratch
players, which makes par worth zero, a birdie worth 2, eagle 5 and
double-eagle 8, while a bogey is a penalty of −1 and a double-bogey or
worse −3. As with the original system, the highest score wins the game,
and terrible scores on one or two holes will not ruin a player's overall
score, but this system rewards "bogey-birdie" play more than the
original, encouraging golfers to try to make riskier birdie putt or
eagle chipshots instead of simply parring each hole.[^45]

#### Basic pairs formats

<figure>
<img src="Junín_Golf_Club_20101031_001.jpg"
title="Junín Golf Club, in Junín, Argentina" />
<figcaption>Junín Golf Club, in <a href="Junín,_Buenos_Aires"
title="wikilink">Junín</a>, Argentina</figcaption>
</figure>

-   [Foursomes](Foursomes "wikilink") (also known as Alternate Shot):
    defined in Rule 22, this is played in pairs, in which each team has
    only one ball and players alternate playing it. For example, if
    players "A" and "B" form a team, "A" tees off on the first hole, "B"
    will play the second shot, "A" the third, and so on until the hole
    is finished. On the second hole, "B" will tee off (regardless who
    played the last putt on the first hole), then "A" plays the second
    shot, and so on. Foursomes can be played as match play or stroke
    play.[^46]
    -   Greensomes (also known as Scotch Foursomes): also called
        modified alternate shot, this is played in pairs; both players
        tee off, and then pick the best shot. The player who did not
        shoot the best first shot plays the second shot. The play then
        alternates as in a foursome.[^47] A variant of greensome is
        sometimes played where the opposing team chooses which of their
        opponent's tee shots the opponents should use.
-   [Four-ball](Four-ball_golf "wikilink"): defined in Rules 23, this is
    also played in pairs, but every each plays their own ball and for
    each team, the lower score on each hole counts. Four-ball can be
    played as match play or stroke play.[^48]

#### Team formats

-   Scramble: also known as ambrose or best-shot; each player in a team
    tees off on each hole, and the players decide which shot was best.
    Every player then plays their second shot from within a clublength
    of where the best shot has come to rest (and no closer to the hole),
    and the procedure is repeated until the hole is finished. This
    system is very common at informal tournaments such as for charity,
    as it speeds play (due to the reduced number of shots taken from bad
    lies), allows teams of varying sizes, and allows players of widely
    varying skill levels to participate without profoundly affecting
    team score.[^49]
-   Best-ball: like four-ball, each player plays the hole as normal, but
    the lowest score of all the players on the team counts as the team's
    score for the hole.[^50] There are many variations on this format,
    which count a different number of scores on each hole.

### Handicap systems

A handicap is a numerical measure of a golfer's potential scoring
ability over 18 holes. It is used to enable players of widely varying
abilities to compete against one another. Better players are those with
the lowest handicaps, and someone with a handicap of 0 or less is often
referred to as a *scratch golfer*. Handicap systems vary throughout the
world and use different methods to assess courses and calculate
handicaps. In order to address difficulties in translating between these
systems the USGA and The R&A, working with the various existing
handicapping authorities, devised a new *World Handicap System* which
was introduced globally starting in 2020.[^51]

Golf courses are assessed and rated according to the average good score
of a scratch golfer, taking into account a multitude of factors
affecting play, such as length, obstacles, undulations, etc. A player's
handicap gives an indication of the number of strokes above this [course
rating](course_rating "wikilink") that the player will make over the
course of an "average best" round of golf, i.e. scoring near their
potential, above average.[^52] Lower handicap players are generally the
most consistent, so can be expected to play to this standard or better
more often than higher handicappers. Some handicap systems also account
for differences in scoring difficulty between low and high handicap
golfer. They do this by means of assessing and rating courses according
to the average good score of a "bogey golfer", a player with a handicap
of around 20. This is used with the course rating to calculate a [slope
rating](slope_rating "wikilink"), which is used to adjust golfer's
handicap to produce a *playing handicap* for the course and set of tees
being used.[^53]

Handicap systems have potential for abuse by players who may
intentionally play badly to increase their handicap
([sandbagging](Glossary_of_cue_sports_terms#sandbag "wikilink")) before
playing to their potential at an important event with a valuable prize.
For this reason, handicaps are not used in professional golf, but they
can still be calculated and used along with other criteria to determine
the relative strengths of various professional players. Touring
professionals, being the best of the best, have negative handicaps; they
can be expected, more often than not, to score lower than the Course
Rating on any course.

## Popularity

![Part of a golf course in western
India](Golfveld.jpg "Part of a golf course in western India") ![An
aerial view of a golf course in
Italy](Golf_course,_Italy_-_20070620.jpg "An aerial view of a golf course in Italy")
In 2005, *[Golf Digest](Golf_Digest "wikilink")* calculated that the
countries with the most golf courses per capita, in order, were:
[Scotland](Golf_in_Scotland "wikilink"), [New
Zealand](Golf_in_New_Zealand "wikilink"),
[Australia](Golf_in_Australia "wikilink"),
[Ireland](Golf_in_Ireland "wikilink"), Canada,
[Wales](Golf_in_Wales "wikilink"), [the United
States](Golf_in_the_United_States "wikilink"),
[Sweden](Golf_in_Sweden "wikilink"), and
[England](Golf_in_England "wikilink") (countries with fewer than 500,000
people were excluded).

The number of courses in other territories has increased, an example of
this being the expansion of [golf in China](golf_in_China "wikilink").
The first golf course in China opened in 1984, but by the end of 2009,
there were roughly 600 golf courses in China. For much of the 21st
century, the development of new golf courses in China has been
officially banned (with the exception of the island province of
[Hainan](Hainan "wikilink")), but the number of courses had nonetheless
tripled from 2004 to 2009; the "ban" has been evaded with the
government's tacit approval simply by not mentioning golf in any
development plans.[^54]

In the United States, women made up 25 percent of golfers in 2021, which
was up from 19 percent since 2011 and junior female golfers account for
35 percent or 1.1 million golfers.[^55]

In the United States, the number of people who play golf twenty-five
times or more per year decreased from 6.9 million in 2000 to 4.6 million
in 2005,[^56] according to the [National Golf
Foundation](National_Golf_Foundation "wikilink"). The NGF reported that
the number who played golf at all decreased from 30 to 26 million over
the same period.[^57]

In February 1971, [astronaut](astronaut "wikilink") [Alan
Shepard](Alan_Shepard "wikilink") became the first person to golf
anywhere other than on [Earth](Earth "wikilink"). He smuggled a golf
club head and two golf balls on board [Apollo 14](Apollo_14 "wikilink")
in order to play golf on the [Moon](Moon "wikilink"). He attached the
head to a tool for collecting rock samples, and attempted two drives. He
shanked the first attempt, but it is estimated his second went .[^58]

### Golf courses worldwide

Below are the countries that have the most golf courses .[^59]

|                   |                                       |          |
|-------------------|---------------------------------------|----------|
| **Country**       | **Number of courses**                 | **%**    |
| USA               | 16,752                                | 43%      |
| Japan             | 3,169                                 | 8%       |
| United Kingdom    | 2,633 (England: 2,270, Scotland: 614) | 8%       |
| Canada            | 2,633                                 | 7%       |
| Australia         | 1,616                                 | 4%       |
| Germany           | 1,050                                 | 3%       |
| France            | 804                                   | 2%       |
| South Korea       | 798                                   | 2%       |
| Sweden            | 662                                   | 2%       |
| China             | 599                                   | 1%       |
| Spain             | 497                                   | 1%       |
| Ireland           | 494                                   | 1%       |
| South Africa      | 489                                   | 1%       |
| New Zealand       | 418                                   | 1%       |
| Argentina         | 349                                   | 1%       |
| Denmark           | 346                                   | 1%       |
| Netherlands       | 330                                   | 1%       |
| Italy             | 321                                   | 1%       |
| Thailand          | 315                                   | 1%       |
| Rest of the world | 4,338                                 | 11%      |
| **Total**         | **38,864**                            | **100%** |

Golf courses by country

## Professional golf

The majority of [professional golfers](professional_golfer "wikilink")
work as club or teaching professionals ("pros"), and only compete in
local competitions. A small elite of professional golfers are
"tournament pros" who compete full-time on international "tours". Many
club and teaching professionals working in the golf industry start as
[caddies](caddies "wikilink") or with a general interest in the game,
finding employment at [golf courses](golf_course "wikilink") and
eventually moving on to certifications in their chosen profession. These
programs include independent institutions and universities, and those
that eventually lead to a Class A golf professional certification.
Touring professionals typically start as amateur players, who attain
their "pro" status after success in major tournaments that win them
either prize money and/or notice from corporate sponsors. [Jack
Nicklaus](Jack_Nicklaus "wikilink"), for example, gained widespread
notice by finishing second in the 1960 [U.S.
Open](U.S._Open_(golf) "wikilink") to champion [Arnold
Palmer](Arnold_Palmer "wikilink"), with a 72-hole score of 282 (the best
score to date in that tournament by an amateur). He played one more
amateur year in 1961, winning that year's [U.S. Amateur
Championship](United_States_Amateur_Championship_(golf) "wikilink"),
before turning pro in 1962.

### Instruction

![Indoor [putting green](Golf_course#Putting_green "wikilink") for
practice and
instruction](Indoor_Putting_Green.JPG "Indoor putting green for practice and instruction")

Golf instruction involves the teaching and learning of the game of golf.
Proficiency in teaching golf instruction requires not only technical and
physical ability but also knowledge of the rules and etiquette of the
game. In some countries, golf instruction is best performed by teachers
certified by the Professional Golfers Association. Some top instructors
who work with professional golfers have become quite well known in their
own right. Professional golf instructors can use physical conditioning,
mental visualization, classroom sessions, club fitting, driving range
instruction, on-course play under real conditions, and review of
videotaped swings in slow motion to teach golf to prepare the golfer for
the course.

### Golf tours

There are at least twenty professional golf tours, each run by a
Professional Golfers Association or an independent tour organization,
which is responsible for arranging events, finding sponsors, and
regulating the tour. Typically a tour has "members" who are entitled to
compete in most of its events, and also invites non-members to compete
in some of them. Gaining membership of an elite tour is highly
competitive, and most professional golfers never achieve it.

![[Gary Player](Gary_Player "wikilink") is widely regarded as one of the
greatest players in the history of
golf.](All_Black.jpg "Gary Player is widely regarded as one of the greatest players in the history of golf.")
Perhaps the most widely known tour is the [PGA
Tour](PGA_Tour "wikilink"), which tends to attract the strongest fields,
outside the four Majors and the four World Golf Championships events.
This is due mostly to the fact that most PGA Tour events have a first
prize of at least 800,000 [USD](USD "wikilink"). The [European
Tour](PGA_European_Tour "wikilink"), which attracts a substantial number
of top golfers from outside North America, ranks second to the PGA Tour
in worldwide prestige. Some top professionals from outside North America
play enough tournaments to maintain membership on both the PGA Tour and
European Tour. Since 2010, both tours' money titles have been claimed by
the same individual three times, with [Luke
Donald](Luke_Donald "wikilink") doing so in 2011 and [Rory
McIlroy](Rory_McIlroy "wikilink") in 2012 and 2014. In 2013, [Henrik
Stenson](Henrik_Stenson "wikilink") won the [FedEx
Cup](FedEx_Cup "wikilink") points race on the PGA Tour and the European
Tour money title, but did not top the PGA Tour money list (that honour
going to [Tiger Woods](Tiger_Woods "wikilink")).

The other leading men's tours include the [Japan Golf
Tour](Japan_Golf_Tour "wikilink"), the [Asian
Tour](Asian_Tour "wikilink") (Asia outside Japan), the [PGA Tour of
Australasia](PGA_Tour_of_Australasia "wikilink"), and the [Sunshine
Tour](Sunshine_Tour "wikilink") (based in southern Africa, primarily
South Africa). The Japan, Australasian, Sunshine, PGA, and European
Tours are the charter members of the trade body of the world's main
tours, the International Federation of PGA Tours, founded in 1996. The
Asian Tour became a full member in 1999. The [Canadian
Tour](PGA_Tour_Canada "wikilink") became an associate member of the
Federation in 2000, and the [Tour de las
Américas](Tour_de_las_Américas "wikilink") (Latin America) became an
associate member of the Federation in 2007. The Federation underwent a
major expansion in 2009 that saw eleven new tours become full members –
the Canadian Tour, Tour de las Américas, China Golf Association, the
Korea Professional Golfers' Association, [Professional Golf Tour of
India](Professional_Golf_Tour_of_India "wikilink"), and the operators of
all six major women's tours worldwide. In 2011, the Tour de las Américas
was effectively taken over by the PGA Tour, and in 2012 was folded into
the new [PGA Tour Latinoamérica](PGA_Tour_Latinoamérica "wikilink").
Also in 2012, the Canadian Tour was renamed [PGA Tour
Canada](PGA_Tour_Canada "wikilink") after it agreed to be taken over by
the PGA Tour. All men's tours that are Federation members, except the
India tour, offer points in the [Official World Golf
Ranking](Official_World_Golf_Ranking "wikilink") (OWGR) to players who
place sufficiently high in their events.

Golf is unique in having lucrative competition for older players. There
are several senior tours for men aged fifty and over, arguably the best
known of which is the U.S.-based [PGA Tour
Champions](PGA_Tour_Champions "wikilink").

There are six principal tours for women, each based in a different
country or continent. The most prestigious of these is the United
States-based [LPGA Tour](LPGA "wikilink"). All of the principal tours
offer points in the [Women's World Golf
Rankings](Women's_World_Golf_Rankings "wikilink") for high finishers in
their events.

All of the leading professional tours for under-50 players have an
official developmental tour, in which the leading players at the end of
the season will earn a tour card on the main tour for the following
season. Examples include the [Korn Ferry
Tour](Korn_Ferry_Tour "wikilink"), which feeds to the PGA Tour, and the
[Challenge Tour](Challenge_Tour "wikilink"), which is the developmental
tour of the European Tour. The Korn Ferry and Challenge Tours also offer
OWGR points.

### Men's major championships

![[Lee Westwood](Lee_Westwood "wikilink") pictured making a bunker shot
at the [2008
Open](2008_Open_Championship "wikilink")](Lee_Westwood_bunker.jpg "Lee Westwood pictured making a bunker shot at the 2008 Open")

The major championships are the four most prestigious men's tournaments
of the year. In chronological order they are: [The
Masters](Masters_Tournament "wikilink"), the [PGA
Championship](PGA_Championship "wikilink"), the [U.S.
Open](U.S._Open_(golf) "wikilink"), and [The Open
Championship](The_Open_Championship "wikilink") (referred to in North
America as the British Open).[^60]

The fields for these events include the top several dozen golfers from
all over the world. The Masters has been played at [Augusta National
Golf Club](Augusta_National_Golf_Club "wikilink") in Augusta, Georgia,
since its inception in 1934. It is the only major championship that is
played at the same course each year.[^61] The U.S. Open and PGA
Championship are played at courses around the United States, while the
Open Championship is played at courses around the United Kingdom.[^62]

Prior to the advent of the PGA Championship and The Masters, the four
Majors were the U.S. Open, the U.S. Amateur, the Open Championship, and
the [British Amateur](The_Amateur_Championship "wikilink").

### Women's major championships

![[Lorena Ochoa](Lorena_Ochoa "wikilink"), a retired number one female
golfer, pictured here in
2007](2007_LPGA_Championship_-_Lorena_Ochoa_(1).jpg "Lorena Ochoa, a retired number one female golfer, pictured here in 2007")
Women's golf does not have a globally agreed set of majors. The list of
majors recognised by the dominant women's tour, the [LPGA
Tour](LPGA "wikilink") in the U.S., has changed several times over the
years, with the most recent changes occurring in 2001 and 2013. Like the
PGA Tour, the (U.S.) LPGA[^63] tour long had four majors, but now has
five: the [Chevron Championship](Chevron_Championship "wikilink")
(previously known by several other names, most recently the ANA
Inspiration), the [Women's PGA
Championship](Women's_PGA_Championship "wikilink") (previously known as
the LPGA Championship),[^64] the [U.S. Women's
Open](United_States_Women's_Open_Championship_(golf) "wikilink"), the
[Women's British Open](Women's_British_Open "wikilink") (which replaced
the [du Maurier Classic](Canadian_Women's_Open "wikilink") as a major in
2001) and [The Evian Championship](The_Evian_Championship "wikilink")
(added as the fifth major in 2013). Only the last two are also
recognised as majors by the [Ladies European
Tour](Ladies_European_Tour "wikilink"). However, the significance of
this is limited, as the LPGA is far more dominant in women's golf than
the PGA Tour is in mainstream men's golf. For example, the
[BBC](BBC "wikilink") has been known to use the U.S. definition of
"women's majors" without qualifying it. Also, the [Ladies' Golf
Union](Ladies'_Golf_Union "wikilink"), the governing body for women's
golf in Great Britain and Ireland, stated on its official website that
the Women's British Open was "the only Women's Major to be played
outside the U.S."[^65] (this was before the elevation of The Evian
Championship to major status).

For many years, the Ladies European Tour tacitly acknowledged the
dominance of the LPGA Tour by not scheduling any of its own events to
conflict with the three LPGA majors played in the U.S., but that changed
beginning in 2008, when the LET scheduled an event opposite the LPGA
Championship. The second-richest women's tour, the [LPGA of Japan
Tour](LPGA_of_Japan_Tour "wikilink"), does not recognise any of the U.S.
LPGA or European majors as it has its own set of majors (historically
three, since 2008 four). However, these events attract little notice
outside Japan.

### Senior major championships

Senior (aged fifty and over) men's golf does not have a globally agreed
set of majors. The list of senior majors on the U.S.-based [PGA Tour
Champions](PGA_Tour_Champions "wikilink") has changed over the years,
but always by expansion. PGA Tour Champions now recognises five majors:
the [Senior PGA Championship](Senior_PGA_Championship "wikilink"), [The
Tradition](The_Tradition "wikilink"), the [Senior Players
Championship](Senior_Players_Championship "wikilink"), the [United
States Senior Open](United_States_Senior_Open "wikilink"), and [The
Senior (British) Open
Championship](Senior_Open_Championship "wikilink").

Of the five events, the Senior PGA is by far the oldest, having been
founded in 1937. The other events all date from the 1980s, when senior
golf became a commercial success as the first golf stars of the
television era, such as [Arnold Palmer](Arnold_Palmer "wikilink") and
[Gary Player](Gary_Player "wikilink"), reached the relevant age. The
Senior Open Championship was not recognised as a major by PGA Tour
Champions until 2003. The [European Senior
Tour](European_Senior_Tour "wikilink") recognises only the Senior PGA
and the two Senior Opens as majors. However, PGA Tour Champions is
arguably more dominant in global senior golf than the U.S. LPGA is in
global women's golf.

### Olympic Games

Golf was featured in the Summer Olympic Games official programme in
[1900](1900_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") and
[1904](1904_Summer_Olympics "wikilink"). After a 112-year absence, golf
returned for the [2016 Rio
Games](Golf_at_the_2016_Summer_Olympics "wikilink").[^66] The
[International Golf Federation
(IGF)](International_Golf_Federation "wikilink") is recognised by the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) as the world governing body for
golf.

## Women

It was not until 1552, that the first woman golfer played the game.
[Mary Queen of Scots](Mary,_Queen_of_Scots "wikilink") commissioned [St.
Andrew's Links](St_Andrews_Links "wikilink").[^67] However, it was not
until the 20th century that women were taken seriously and eventually
broke the "Gentlemen Only, Ladies Forbidden" rule. Many men saw women as
unfit to play the sport due to their supposed lack of strength and
ability.

In 1891, the newly built [Shinnecock
Hills](Shinnecock_Hills_Golf_Club "wikilink") nine-hole course in
[Southampton, New York](Southampton,_New_York "wikilink") became the
first club to offer membership to women golfers. Four years later, in
1895, The U.S. Golf Association held the first Women's Amateur
Championship tournament.[^68][^69]

Just like professional golfer [Bobby
Jones](Bobby_Jones_(golfer) "wikilink"), [Joyce
Wethered](Joyce_Wethered "wikilink") was considered to be a star in the
1920s.[^70] Jones praised Wethered in 1930 after they had played an
exhibition against each other. He doubted that there had ever been a
better golfer, man or woman.[^71] However, Bobby Jones' comment was not
enough for others to change their views on women golfers.

The [Royal Liverpool's](Royal_Liverpool_Golf_Club "wikilink") club
refused entry of [Sir Henry Cotton](Henry_Cotton_(golfer) "wikilink")'s
wife into the clubhouse in the late 1940s. The secretary of the club
released a statement saying, "No woman ever has entered the clubhouse
and, praise God, no woman ever will."[^72] However, American golfer and
all-around athlete [Babe Zaharias](Babe_Zaharias "wikilink") did not
have to enter the clubhouse. She was able to prove herself on the
course, going on to become the first American to win the British Women's
Amateur title in 1947. The following year she became the first woman to
attempt to qualify for the [U.S. Open](U.S._Open_(golf) "wikilink"), but
her application was rejected by the
[USGA](United_States_Golf_Association "wikilink"). They stated that the
event was intended to be open to men only.[^73]

The [Ladies Professional Golf Association](LPGA "wikilink") was formed
in 1950 as a way to popularize the sport and provide competitive
opportunities for golfers.[^74] The competitions were not the same for
the men and women. It was not until 1972 that [U.S.
Congress](United_States_Congress "wikilink") passed the [Title IX of the
Education Amendments](Title_IX "wikilink"). "No person in the United
States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be
denied the benefits of, or be subject to discrimination under any
education program or activities receiving Federal financial
assistance."[^75] American [Renee Powell](Renee_Powell "wikilink") moved
to the UK in the 1970s to further her career, and became the first woman
to play in a British men's tournament in 1977.[^76]

As of 2016, women golfers were still fighting to have the same
opportunities as male golfers. There is still a significant pay gap in
the USGA. The USGA has a long history of awarding more prize money to
winners of the men's U.S. Open, than the U.S. Women's Open.[^77]

## International events

-   [Golf at the Asian Games](Golf_at_the_Asian_Games "wikilink")
-   [Curtis Cup](Curtis_Cup "wikilink")
-   [EurAsia Cup](EurAsia_Cup "wikilink")
-   [International Crown](International_Crown "wikilink")
-   [Golf at the Summer
    Olympics](Golf_at_the_Summer_Olympics "wikilink")
-   [Golf at the Pan American
    Games](Golf_at_the_Pan_American_Games "wikilink")
-   [Presidents Cup](Presidents_Cup "wikilink")
-   [Ryder Cup](Ryder_Cup "wikilink")
-   [Seve Trophy](Seve_Trophy "wikilink")
-   [Solheim Cup](Solheim_Cup "wikilink")
-   [Golf at the Summer
    Universiade](Golf_at_the_Summer_Universiade "wikilink")
-   [Walker Cup](Walker_Cup "wikilink")

## See also

-   [Glossary of golf](Glossary_of_golf "wikilink")
-   [Outline of golf](Outline_of_golf "wikilink")
-   [Lists of golfers](Lists_of_golfers "wikilink")
-   [List of golf courses in the United
    Kingdom](List_of_golf_courses_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
-   [Professional Golfers' Association of
    America](Professional_Golfers'_Association_of_America "wikilink")
-   [Pitch & Putt](Pitch_&_Putt "wikilink")
-   [Miniature golf](Miniature_golf "wikilink")
-   [Variations of golf](Variations_of_golf "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   

-   [The R&A, St Andrews](http://www.randa.org/)

-   [USGA: United States Golf Association](http://www.usga.org/)

-   [Golf Australia, national governing body of
    Australia](http://www.golf.org.au/)

-   [International Golf Federation (IGF)](https://www.igfgolf.org/)

[ ](Category:Golf "wikilink") [Category:Precision
sports](Category:Precision_sports "wikilink") [Category:Ball and bat
games](Category:Ball_and_bat_games "wikilink") [Category:Sports
originating in
Scotland](Category:Sports_originating_in_Scotland "wikilink")
[Category:Summer Olympic
sports](Category:Summer_Olympic_sports "wikilink") [Category:Scottish
games](Category:Scottish_games "wikilink") [Category:15th-century
introductions](Category:15th-century_introductions "wikilink")
[Category:Turf sports](Category:Turf_sports "wikilink")

[^1]:

[^2]:

[^3]:

[^4]:

[^5]:

[^6]:

[^7]:

[^8]: [History Of
    Golf](http://www.golf-information.info/history-of-golf.html) Golf
    Information.info.

[^9]: Andrew Leibs (2004). *Sports and Games of the Renaissance*. p. 69.
    Greenwood Publishing Group

[^10]: Cochrane, Alistair (ed) Science and Golf IV: proceedings of the
    World Scientific Congress of Golf. Page 849. Routledge

[^11]: Forrest L. Richardson (2002). *Routing the Golf Course: The Art &
    Science That Forms the Golf Journey*. p. 46. John Wiley & Sons

[^12]:

[^13]:

[^14]: ["Historical Rules of Golf"](http://www.ruleshistory.com/) .
    ruleshistory.com. Retrieved 8 September 2010.

Short description\|Measure of a golfer's playing ability

## History

The earliest record of golf handicapping is thought to be from the late
17th century, in a diary kept by [Thomas
Kincaid](Thomas_Kincaid "wikilink"), who was a student in
[Edinburgh](Edinburgh "wikilink"), Scotland, although the word
*handicap* would not come into use in golf until the late 19th century.
The number of strokes to be given and the holes on which they would be
in effect was negotiated between competing golfers prior to the start of
play. According to *The Golfer's Manual* by [Henry Brougham
Farnie](Henry_Brougham_Farnie "wikilink"), examples of agreed terms
included "third-one" (one stroke every three holes), "half-one" (one
stroke every two holes), "one more" (a stroke a hole) and "two more"
(two strokes a hole).[^1][^2]

During the late 19th century, taking the difference between the average
of a golfer's best three scores during the year and
[par](Par_(golf) "wikilink") became the most widely used method of
handicapping in England and Scotland. As the sport grew, so did
discontent with the fairness of handicapping, with less proficient
players being particularly unhappy as it was much less likely for them
to play to the standard of their three-score average. Another issue was
the lack of consideration in the system for the varying difficulties of
different courses which meant the handicap was not very portable.[^3]

In an attempt to remedy the problems with a fairly basic handicap
system, along with many variations of that system and other systems also
being used, the authorities in Great Britain and Ireland sought to
standardize. One of the first standard and equitable handicap systems
was introduced by the [Ladies Golf Union](Ladies_Golf_Union "wikilink")
(LGU) in the 1890s. This was largely achieved by means of union-assigned
[course ratings](#Course_Rating "wikilink"), instead of clubs using
their own. It was not until the formation of the British Golf Unions
Joint Advisory Committee in 1924 that the men's game fully coordinated
to create an equitable handicap system, that included a uniform course
rating, throughout Great Britain and Ireland; the *Standard Scratch
Score and Handicapping Scheme* was introduced in 1926.[^4][^5]

In the United States there was a single authority governing the sport,
the [USGA](USGA "wikilink"), which made moving to a single standard
handicapping scheme somewhat easier. Introduced in 1911, the first
national handicap system was based on the British three-score average
system. The biggest development was a "par rating" system that assessed
the average good score of a scratch golfer on every course, which made
the handicap more portable. It also made clear that a player's handicap
was intended to reflect their potential rather than average play. Having
initially allowed clubs to determine their own par ratings, the USGA
quickly changed their minds and began assigning ratings. The USGA
Handicap System has further developed through the years, with an
increase in the number of scores used for handicap calculations, the
introduction of [Equitable Stroke
Control](Equitable_Stroke_Control "wikilink"),[^6] and improvements to
the course rating system. However the most significant change was the
creation of the [slope rating](slope_rating "wikilink") system, which
enables handicaps to allow for differences in difficulty between scratch
and bogey golfers. USGA Course and Slope Ratings now form the basis of
many other handicap systems.[^7]

As the sport grew globally, associations around the world each created
or adapted their own rules relating to handicaps. By the early 21st
century, there were six major recognized handicapping systems in
operation around the world: USGA Handicap System, EGA Handicap System,
CONGU Unified Handicap System, Golf Australia Handicap System, South
African Handicap System, and Argentinian Handicap System. While these
systems share some common features, e.g. most use a common course rating
system, they are not easily portable because their differences create
difficulties in converting handicaps between systems. In order to
eliminate these problems the USGA and The R&A, working with the various
existing handicapping authorities, devised a new *World Handicap System*
which was phased in globally in 2020.[^8][^9]

## Overview

[Amateur golfers](Amateur_golf "wikilink") who are members of golf clubs
are generally eligible for official handicaps on payment of the
prevailing regional and national association annual fees. Official
handicaps are administered by [golf
clubs](golf_club_(institution) "wikilink") with the associations often
providing additional peer reviewing for low handicaps. Other systems,
often free of charge, are available to golfers who are ineligible for
official handicaps. Handicap systems are not generally used in
[professional golf](Professional_golf_tours "wikilink"). A golfer whose
handicap is zero is referred to as a **scratch golfer**, and one whose
handicap is approximately 18 as a **bogey golfer**.[^10]

While the USGA administers its own handicapping system, the
administration of handicapping systems in countries affiliated to The
R&A is the responsibility of the national golf associations of those
countries. These bodies have different methods of producing handicaps
but they are all generally based on calculating an individual player's
playing ability from their recent history of rounds. Therefore, a
handicap is not fixed but is regularly adjusted to increases or
decreases in a player's scoring. Some systems (e.g. World Handicap
System, USGA, European Golf Association) involve calculation of a
playing handicap which is dependent on the
[course](golf_course "wikilink") being played and set of
[tees](teeing_ground "wikilink") that are being used, whereas others
(e.g. CONGU's Unified Handicap System) just use the allocated handicap
rounded to the nearest whole number.

Contrary to popular opinion, a player's handicap is intended to reflect
a player's potential or "average best", not a player's overall average
score. Statistically, low handicappers will play to their handicap more
often because they are likely to be more consistent than higher
handicappers.

## Features of handicapping systems

### Scoring

The total number of strokes taken for a hole (or round) before
accounting for a golfer's handicap is called the *gross score* for that
hole (or round), and the number of strokes taken after subtracting any
handicap allowance is called the *net score*.[^11]

Note that the *gross score* in 'world handicap system' is calculated as
the number of strokes taken for a hole ***+ the handicap allowance for
that hole*.** The *adjusted gross score* in 'world handicap system' is
the *gross score* adjusted such that the maximum on any particular hole
is the number of strokes taken for a hole + the handicap allowance for
that hole + 2 strokes (i.e. net double bogey).

In handicap [stroke play](stroke_play "wikilink") competitions, a
golfer's [playing handicap](#Playing_or_course_handicap "wikilink") is
subtracted from the total number of strokes taken to produce a net
score, which is then used to determine the final results. In handicap
[Stableford](Stableford "wikilink") competitions, a player's handicap is
distributed according to predetermined hole ratings ([stroke
index](stroke_index "wikilink")) and strokes deducted accordingly from
each hole score before calculating the points for that hole. In [match
play](match_play "wikilink"), the handicap difference between players
(or teams) is used to determine the number of strokes the high handicap
player should receive from the low handicapper during the playing of
their round; each of these strokes are received on the lowest numbered
stroke index holes.[^12] Stroke allowances may sometimes be reduced by a
set percentage in order to maintain the level playing field; this is
especially common in pairs and team competitions.

### Course Rating

Course Rating, (Standard) Scratch Score, Scratch Rating, and Standard
Rating are largely equivalent ratings that are used to indicate the
average "good score" by a scratch golfer for a set of tees on a golf
course. For a par 72 course, the course rating is generally between 67
and 77. There are different methods of calculating the Course Rating,
with the length of the course and its obstacles being the biggest
factors. Some systems use only these two, or even length alone, but most
modern handicapping systems now use the *USGA Course Rating* system
which assesses the difficulty of all aspects of the course, e.g.
altitude, wide or narrow [fairways](fairway_(golf) "wikilink"), length
of any rough, the size and contours of the
[greens](green_(golf) "wikilink"), etc.[^1][^2]

Some handicapping systems provide for an adjustment to the course rating
to account for variations in playing conditions on any given day, e.g.
course setup and weather, and it is against this adjusted rating that
handicaps are assessed and maintained. Examples of adjusted ratings are
Playing Conditions Calculation (World Handicap System), Competition
Scratch Score (CONGU Unified Handicapping System), Daily Scratch Rating
(Golf Australia Handicap System), and Calculated Rating (South African
Handicap System).

Analogous to course rating is the bogey rating, which is a measure of
the playing difficulty of a course for a [bogey
golfer](bogey_golfer "wikilink").

### Slope Rating

Devised by the USGA, the Slope Rating of a golf course describes the
relative difficulty of a course for a bogey golfer compared to a scratch
golfer. Slope Ratings are in the range 55 to 155, with a course of
standard relative difficulty having a rating of 113; the higher the
number, the more relatively difficult the course is.

### Playing or course handicap

In most major handicapping systems, a golfer does not use their exact
handicap (or handicap index) directly, but use it to produce their
playing or course handicap. For some systems, this means simply rounding
the exact handicap to the nearest whole number; however, systems that
use slope ratings require a more complex calculation to produce a course
handicap with some also factoring in the course rating:

$$\mbox{Course handicap} = \frac{ ( \mbox{handicap index} \times \mbox{slope rating} ) }{ \mbox{113}}$$
or

$$\mbox{Course handicap} = \frac{ ( \mbox{handicap index} \times \mbox{slope rating} ) }{ \mbox{113}} + ( \mbox{course rating} - \mbox{par} )$$

The USGA and Golf Australia systems use the first calculation; the WHS,
EGA, and Golf RSA systems use the second. Under CONGU's Unified
Handicapping System the exact handicap is rounded to the nearest whole
number to produce the playing handicap, and in the Argentinian system
the exact handicap is used directly.

A playing handicap may also refer to the stroke allowance for a given
competition dependent on [playing
format](variations_of_golf "wikilink"), and is generally calculated as a
percentage of the course handicap.

### Stroke Index

The Stroke Index is a number that has been assigned to each hole on a
golf course, and usually printed on the scorecard, to indicate on which
holes handicap strokes should be applied. On an 18-hole course, each
hole is assigned a different number from 1 to 18 (1 to 9 on a 9-hole
course). The lowest numbers are usually given to the holes where a
higher handicapper is most likely to benefit, and the highest numbers to
the holes they are least likely to benefit. Odd numbers will be
allocated to either the first or second 9-holes (and even numbers to the
other) to ensure a balanced distribution of handicap strokes, and
guidelines generally recommend avoiding having the lowest numbers at the
start or end of each nine in order to prevent early stroke allowances in
playoffs between golfers with similar handicaps or strokes going unused
if they are at the end.[^3]

### Maximum hole score

Most of the commonly used handicap systems seek to reduce the impact of
very high scores on one or more individual holes on the calculation and
updating of handicaps. This is achieved by setting a maximum score on
each hole, which is only used for handicapping purposes; i.e. it is not
used for determining results of competitions or matches. This *maximum
hole score* is either a fixed number or a [net
score](#Scoring "wikilink") relative to par. *Equitable Stroke Control*
(ESC) and *net double bogey* (also called Stableford Points Adjustments)
are the two most common mechanisms for defining a maximum hole score.

### Handicap differential

Handicap (or score) differentials are a feature of many handicapping
systems. They are a standardized measure of a golfers performance,
adjusted to take account of the course being played. Normally the
overall score will be adjusted prior to the calculation, e.g. by means
of [ESC or net double bogey](#Maximum_hole_score "wikilink"). The course
rating may also be adjusted to take account of conditions on the day.

For handicapping systems that use course and slope ratings, a typical
calculation using the *score* (see above) is as follows:

$$\mbox{Handicap differential} = \frac{ ( \mbox{adjusted score} - \mbox{course rating} ) \times \mbox{113}}{ \mbox{slope rating}}$$

The differentials are used both to calculate initial handicaps and
maintain existing ones, by taking a mean average of a set number of the
best recent differentials (e.g. the USGA system uses the best 10
differentials from the last 20 scores).

For other handicapping systems, the differentials are simply the
difference between the (adjusted) gross or net scores and a specified
standard rating (e.g. course rating, standard scratch score, etc.), and
they are used in different ways to maintain handicaps.

### Peer review

In golf clubs, peer review is usually managed by an elected Handicap
Secretary who, supported by a small committee, conducts an Annual Review
of the handicaps of all members and assesses ad hoc requests from
individual members (usually when age or medium to long-term infirmity
affects their playing ability). This gives uniformity to handicapping
across their club for the setting and maintenance of handicaps with the
objective of establishing fair competition between golfers of all
abilities.

At the regional level, peer review is extended to include rigorous
validation of the handicap returns of low handicap golfers. This ensures
that only golfers of an appropriate standard gain entry to their elite
tournaments. Occasionally, golfers are excluded from the elite game as a
consequence of being found to abuse the system. To a degree, these
regional bodies also monitor the performance of and provide training for
Handicap Secretaries at the club level.

Nationally, the peer review is extended further to assessing golfers
from external jurisdictions for their suitability for entry into their
elite international events. They also play a large part in periodic
reviews of the handicapping system itself to improve it for the future.

## Handicapping systems

### World Handicap System

Due to the many different handicapping systems in use around the world,
and the many inconsistencies within them, which makes it difficult to
compete on an equal footing where another handicap system is in use, the
sports major governing bodies, in 2011 [The R&A](The_R&A "wikilink") and
the [USGA](USGA "wikilink") began work on creation of a single uniform
handicapping system to be used everywhere.[^1] In February 2018, they
announced that the World Handicap System (WHS) would be launched in
2020.[^2] Once introduced, the World Handicap System will continue to be
governed by The R&A and the USGA with the six existing major
handicapping authorities (the USGA, the [Council of National Golf
Unions](Council_of_National_Golf_Unions "wikilink") (CONGU) in Great
Britain and Ireland, the [European Golf
Association](European_Golf_Association "wikilink") (EGA), [Golf
Australia](Golf_Australia "wikilink"), the [South African Golf
Association](South_African_Golf_Association "wikilink") (SAGA), and the
[Argentine Golf Association](Argentine_Golf_Association "wikilink")
(AAG)) administering the system at a local level.[^3][^4]

The WHS is based on the USGA Course and Slope Rating system, and largely
follows the USGA Handicap System while also incorporating features from
the six major existing handicap systems. For example, 8 differentials
(like the Golf Australia system) are used after net double bogey
adjustments (like the CONGU and EGA systems) for handicap calculations,
and the WHS course/playing handicap includes a course rating adjustment
(like the EGA system).[^5] For players with current handicaps, their
handicap records in the old systems will be used to produce WHS
handicaps; the expectation is that most players will at most see a
difference of one or two strokes, if any.

A new WHS handicap requires several scores to be submitted; the
recommendation is a minimum of 54 holes made up of any number of 9 or
18-hole rounds in order to achieve a reasonable fair and accurate
result, although handicaps may be issued from a smaller sample. Handicap
adjustments will be made upon submission of any 9 or 18-hole scores with
updates published daily; unlike some other systems both competitive and
recreational rounds may be submitted by all players (e.g. CONGU's
Unified Handicapping System only allows submission of non-qualifying
scores by golfers in Category 2 or above). Ongoing handicaps are based
on the average of the best 8 differentials, but with an "anchor" to
prevent rapid increases that would not necessarily reflect the player's
true potential. There is also a hole limit of "net double bogey" for
handicapping purposes in order to prevent one or two bad holes from
having a disproportionate effect.[^6]

#### World Handicap System overview

A WHS handicap is calculated with a specific arithmetic formula that
approximates how many strokes above or below
[par](Par_(score) "wikilink") a player might be able to play, based on
the eight best scores of their last twenty rounds.[^7] The calculation
has several variables, including: the player's scores from their most
recent rounds, the course rating, and the slope rating.

A [score differential](#Handicap_differential "wikilink") is calculated
from each of the scores after any [net double
bogey](#Maximum_hole_score "wikilink") adjustments (an adjustment which
allows for a maximum number of strokes per hole based on the player's
course handicap) have been applied, using the following formula:

$$\mbox{18-hole score differential} = \frac{\mbox{113}}{\mbox{slope rating}} \times ({\mbox{adjusted gross score}} - {\mbox{course rating}} - {\mbox{PCC adjustment}})$$

$$\mbox{9-hole score differential} = \frac{\mbox{113}}{\mbox{slope rating}} \times ({\mbox{adjusted gross score}} - {\mbox{course rating}} - ({\mbox{0.5}} \times {\mbox{PCC adjustment}}))$$

Only 18-hole differentials are used for the calculation of a handicap
index. As such, 9-hole differentials need to be combined before being
used, subject to remaining one of the 20 most recent differentials. The
system also allows for situations where less than 18 (or 9) hole have
been played, subject to a minimum of 14 (or 7) holes having been
completed, by "scaling up" with net pars for any missing holes.

The score differentials are rounded to one decimal place, and the best 8
from the last 20 submitted scores are then averaged and rounded to one
decimal place to produce the handicap index. Initial handicaps are
calculated from a minimum of five scores using adjustments that limit
each hole score to a maximum of (par + 5). If there are at least 5 but
fewer than 20 qualifying scores available, the handicap index is
calculated using a set number or differentials according to how many
scores are available, with an additional adjustment made to that average
in some circumstances.

| Number of rounds | Differentials to use | Adjustment to average |
|------------------|----------------------|-----------------------|
| 3                | lowest 1             | -2.0                  |
| 4                | lowest 1             | -1.0                  |
| 5                | lowest 1             | 0                     |
| 6                | lowest 2             | -1.0                  |
| 7 or 8           | lowest 2             | 0                     |
| 9 to 11          | lowest 3             | 0                     |
| 12 to 14         | lowest 4             | 0                     |
| 15 or 16         | lowest 5             | 0                     |
| 17 or 18         | lowest 6             | 0                     |
| 19               | lowest 7             | 0                     |

The basic formula for calculating the handicap index is as follows
(where *n* is the number of differentials to use), with the result
rounded to one decimal place:

$$\mbox{Handicap index} = (\frac{1}{n}\sum\_{x=1}^{n} \mbox{Differential}\_x) + \mbox{adjustment}$$

The handicap index is not used directly for playing purposes, but used
to calculate a course handicap according to the slope rating of the set
of tees being used with an adjustment based on the difference between
the course rating and par. The result is rounded to the nearest whole
number. For competitions, the unrounded course handicap is converted to
a playing handicap by applying a handicap allowance, dependent on the
format of play.

$$\mbox{Course Handicap} = \frac{ ( \mbox{Handicap index} \times \mbox{Slope Rating} )}{113} + ( \mbox{course rating} - \mbox{par} )$$

The WHS contains measures reduce a handicap index more quickly in the
case of exceptional scoring, and also to prevent a handicap index from
rising too quickly. This is done by means of "soft" and "hard" caps
based on the lowest index during the previous 365 days; the soft cap
reduces increases above 3.0 to 50%, and the hard cap limits increases to
5.0. Updates to a golfer's handicap index are issued daily.

Many elements of WHS have flexibility which allows for local authorities
to determine their own settings, but the basic handicap index
calculation remains the same. Examples include: 9-hole scores may be
scaled-up rather than combined; (course rating − par) may be omitted
from the course handicap calculation; and the rounded course handicap
may be used in the playing handicap calculation.[^8]
### USGA Handicap System

The first handicap system to be introduced by the USGA was largely the
work of [Leighton Calkins](Leighton_Calkins "wikilink"), who based it on
the British "three-score average" system where the handicap was
calculated as the average of the best three scores to par in the last
year. The key difference was the introduction of a par rating (later
known as course rating), which was based on the ability of leading
amateur [Jerome Travers](Jerome_Travers "wikilink"), to account for
variances in the playing difficulty of different courses. After
initially allowing clubs to determine their own ratings, at the behest
of Calkins the USGA quickly began assigning ratings centrally. Course
ratings were rounded to the nearest whole number until 1967, when they
started being given to one decimal place.[^1]

In 1947, the number of scores used to calculate handicaps was increased
to the best 10 from all scores ever recorded subject to a minimum of 50.
However this was not uniformly implemented, with regional associations
disagreeing on the total number of rounds to be considered. In 1958, the
USGA specified that the best 10 from 25 scores would be used. This was
reduced to 10 from 20 in 1967, which remains to this day although a
further adjustment was made with the introduction of a "Bonus of
Excellence" multiplier to equalize handicaps and give better players a
marginal advantage. Originally 85%, the multiplier was changed to 96%
after being seen to favor better players too heavily. In 1974,
[Equitable Stroke Control](#Maximum_hole_score "wikilink") was adopted
in order to eliminate the effect of very high individual hole scores on
handicap calculations.[^2]

With the system still not accounting for variances in playing difficulty
for golfers of different abilities, in 1979 the USGA set to work on how
to address the issue with the creation of the Handicap Research Team.
The result of their work was the creation of what is now the [Slope
system](Slope_rating "wikilink"). Slope was gradually introduced,
firstly in Colorado in 1982, before being implemented nationally from
1987. The USGA then set about making further refinements to the course
rating system, which at the time was still largely dependent on length,
to take account of many other factors affecting scoring ability for a
scratch golfer.[^3] The USGA Course and Slope Rating system is now used
by most of the world's major handicapping systems.[^4]

The USGA Handicap System is used throughout the jurisdiction of the
[USGA](USGA "wikilink") (i.e. the United States and Mexico), and is also
licensed for use in many other countries around the world, e.g.
[Canada](Golf_Canada "wikilink").[^5] The USGA has often resorted to the
courts to protect the integrity of its handicap system. In one such
case, the [California Court of
Appeal](California_Courts_of_Appeal "wikilink") (First District)
summarized the system's history:

#### USGA Handicap System overview

A USGA handicap is calculated with a specific arithmetic formula that
approximates how many strokes above or below
[par](Par_(score) "wikilink") a player might be able to play, based on
the ten best scores of their last twenty rounds.[^6] The calculation has
several variables: the player's scores from their most recent rounds,
and the course and slope ratings from those rounds.

A [handicap differential](#Handicap_Differential "wikilink") is
calculated from each of the scores after [Equitable Stroke
Control](Equitable_Stroke_Control "wikilink") (ESC), an adjustment which
allows for a maximum number of strokes per hole based on the player's
course handicap, has been applied using the following formula:

$$\mbox{Handicap differential} = \frac{ ( \mbox{ESC adjusted score} - \mbox{course rating} ) \times \mbox{113}}{ \mbox{slope rating}}$$

The handicap differentials are rounded to one decimal place, and the
best 10 from the last 20 submitted scores are then averaged, before
being multiplied by 0.96 (the "bonus of excellence") and truncated to
one decimal place to produce the handicap index. Initial handicaps are
calculated from a minimum of five scores using ESC adjustments based on
the course handicap corresponding to a handicap index of 36.4 for men or
40.4 for women. If there are at least 5 but fewer than 20 qualifying
scores available, the handicap index is calculated using a set number or
differentials according to how many scores are available.[^7]

| Number of rounds | Differentials to use |
|------------------|----------------------|
| 5 or 6           | lowest 1             |
| 7 or 8           | lowest 2             |
| 9 or 10          | lowest 3             |
| 11 or 12         | lowest 4             |
| 13 or 14         | lowest 5             |
| 15 or 16         | lowest 6             |
| 17               | lowest 7             |
| 18               | lowest 8             |
| 19               | lowest 9             |

The basic formula for calculating the handicap index is as follows
(where *n* is the number of differentials to use), with the result
truncated to one decimal place:

$$\mbox{Handicap index} = \frac{0.96}{n}\sum\_{x=1}^{n} \mbox{Differential}\_x$$

The handicap index is not used directly for playing purposes, but used
to calculate a course handicap according to the slope rating of the set
of tees being used. The result is rounded to the nearest whole
number.[^8]

$$\mbox{Course Handicap} = \frac{ ( \mbox{Handicap index} \times \mbox{Slope Rating} )}{113}$$

Updates to a golfer's handicap index are issued periodically, generally
once or twice per month depending on the local state and regional golf
associations.[^9]

### CONGU Unified Handicapping System

Following a meeting of the four men's golf unions of Great Britain and
Ireland in [York](York "wikilink") arranged by [The Royal and Ancient
Golf Club of St
Andrews](The_Royal_and_Ancient_Golf_Club_of_St_Andrews "wikilink") in
1924, the British Golf Unions Joint Advisory Committee (later [Council
of National Golf Unions](Council_of_National_Golf_Unions "wikilink"))
was formed. The organization was tasked with creating a handicapping
system that would be equitable to golfers of varying ability, and as a
result the **Standard Scratch Score and Handicapping Scheme** was
devised. The system was introduced in 1926, and used a "scratch score"
system to rate courses, taking account that courses may play easier or
more difficult than [par](par_(golf) "wikilink").[^10]

A new system was introduced in 1983, which incorporated features of the
Australian system. This was further revised in 1989 with the
introduction of the *Competition Scratch Score* (CSS), an adjustment to
the *Standard Scratch Score* (SSS), to take account of variances in
course conditions (setup, weather, etc.) on a given day.[^11] Further
significant changes came in 1993 (buffer zones) and 1997 (Stableford
Points Adjustment). In 2002, the Council of National Golf Unions (CONGU)
and the [Ladies' Golf Union](Ladies'_Golf_Union "wikilink") (LGU) began
working together (the LGU had adopted a system similar to that of CONGU
in 1998) and in February 2004 the **Unified Handicapping System** (UHS)
came into force.[^12]

The Unified Handicapping System is used to manage handicaps for both men
and women who are members of affiliated [golf
clubs](golf_club_(institution) "wikilink") in the United Kingdom and the
Republic of Ireland. The system is published by CONGU and administered
by each of the individual unions on behalf of their members,[^13] with
handicaps being managed locally by someone at each club; this person
normally holds the position of competitions or handicap secretary.

#### Unified Handicapping System overview

Under the Unified Handicapping System, initial handicaps are allocated
based on returned scores from 54 holes, usually three 18-hole
rounds.[^14] The number of strokes taken on each hole is adjusted to
maximum of double the par of the hole before adding up the scores;
adjustments were previously 2 over par for men and 3 over par for
women.[^15] The best of the "adjusted gross differentials" (AGD) between
the adjusted score and the Standard Scratch Score (SSS) is taken to
calculate the initial handicap using the following formula, with the
result truncated to give a whole number:

$$\mbox{Initial handicap} = \frac{ ( \mbox{Lowest AGD} + ( \mbox{Lowest AGD} \times \mbox{0.13}) ) }{ \mbox{1.237}}$$
Adjustments may be made to the initial handicap should it be deemed
necessary to ensure it is reasonably fair. Handicaps are given to one
decimal place and divided into categories with the lowest handicaps
being in Category 1. Prior to 2018, the highest handicaps were in
Category 4 for men, with a maximum of 28.0, and Category 5 for women,
with a maximum of 36.0, with provision for higher "club" or "disability"
handicaps up to a limit of 54.0 for those who cannot play to these lower
limits.[^16] In 2018, handicap limits were standardized at 54.0 and a
Category 5 was introduced for men, and a new Category 6 for all,
replacing the club and disability category (see table below). The exact
handicap is rounded to the nearest whole number to give the playing
handicap.[^17] Many handicap competitions still have maximum limits of
28 for men and 36 for women.

For all qualifying scores that are returned, adjustments are made to a
players exact handicap based on the Competition Scratch Score (CSS). All
hole scores are first adjusted to a maximum of net 2-over par with
handicap strokes being used per the [stroke
index](stroke_index "wikilink") published on the scorecard; this is
called Stableford or net double-bogey adjustment. Every stroke the
adjusted net score is below the CSS triggers a reduction dependent on
the players handicap category; for Category 1 this is 0.1 per stroke,
for Category 2 it is 0.2, etc. Should the adjusted net score exceed the
CSS , there is a *buffer zone* equivalent to the handicap category
before a 0.1 increase is applied, which is the same for all categories;
for Category 1 there is 1 stroke buffer, for Category 2 it is 2 strokes,
etc.[^18] The Competition Scratch Score is an adjustment to the Standard
Scratch Score computed from all scores returned and is in the range
(*S**S**S* − 1) to (*S**S**S* + 3) with provision for "reduction only"
when scoring conditions have proved especially difficult.[^19]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Category</p></th>
<th><p>Exact<br />
handicap</p></th>
<th><p>Playing<br />
handicap</p></th>
<th><p>Reduction per stroke<br />
better than CSS</p></th>
<th><p>Increase for scores<br />
exceeding CSS + buffer</p></th>
<th><p>Buffer</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>≤5.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>≤5</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>1 stroke</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>2</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>5.5 to 12.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>6 to 12</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.2</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>2 strokes</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>3</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>12.5 to 20.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>13 to 20</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.3</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>3 strokes</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>20.5 to 28.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>21 to 28</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>4 strokes</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>5</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>28.5 to 36.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>29 to 36</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.5</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>5 strokes</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>6</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>36.5 to 54.0</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>37 to 54</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.6</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>6 strokes</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In addition to playing in qualifying competitions, golfers in Category 2
and above may also submit a number of *supplementary scores* in order to
maintain their handicap; primarily a feature to accommodate golfers who
play in few competitions and allow them to maintain current handicaps,
it is also used by people who wish to try and get their handicap down
while they are playing well. There are other mechanisms in the system to
reduce or increase handicaps more quickly. Every year all handicaps are
reviewed and adjusted if necessary to ensure they remain fair and
accurate. In addition, any very good scores are monitored throughout the
year and an *exceptional scoring reduction* may be applied if certain
triggers are reached.

Historically calculating the CSS and any handicap adjustments was done
manually by means of published tables, but this is now computerized with
handicaps being published to a Centralised Database of Handicaps (CDH).

### EGA Handicap System

The EGA Handicap System is the [European Golf
Association](European_Golf_Association "wikilink")'s method of
evaluating golf abilities so that players of different standards can
compete in handicap events on equal terms. It is based on
[Stableford](Stableford "wikilink") scoring and has some similarities to
both the CONGU system, with regards to handicap categories and
adjustments, and to the USGA system, with regards to the use of
[course](#Course_Rating "wikilink") and [slope](slope_rating "wikilink")
ratings and calculating playing handicaps. The first version of the
system was introduced in 2000.[^20]

#### EGA Handicap System overview

Under the EGA Handicap System, initial handicaps require just a single 9
or 18-hole score recorded using the maximum handicap of 54. The handicap
is then calculated from the number of Stableford points scored.

Initial handicap = 54 − (Stableford points − 36)

EGA handicaps are given to one decimal place and divided into
categories, with the lowest handicaps being in Category 1 and the
highest in Category 6 (see table below). The handicap is not used
directly for playing purposes and a calculation must be done to
determine a "playing handicap" specific to the course being played and
set of tees being used. For handicaps in categories 1 to 5, the formula
is as follows with the result rounded to the nearest whole number:

$$\mbox{Playing handicap} = \frac{ ( \mbox{handicap index} \times \mbox{slope rating} ) }{ \mbox{113}} + ( \mbox{course rating} - \mbox{par} )$$

And for category 6 a "playing handicap differential" is used, which is
equal to the playing handicap for a handicap index of 36.0:

Playing handicap = (handicap index + playing handicap differential)

For all qualifying scores that are returned, adjustments are made to a
players handicap index. All scores are first converted into Stableford
points if necessary (i.e. rounds played using another scoring method,
e.g. stroke play), effectively applying a [net double
bogey](#Maximum_hole_score "wikilink") adjustment, and then for every
point scored above the *buffer zone* there is a reduction applied to the
players handicap index according to their handicap category; for
Category 1 this is 0.1 per point, for Category 2 it is 0.2, etc. Should
the number of points scored be below the buffer zone, a fixed increase
of 0.1 is applied to the handicap index regardless of category. The EGA
system also takes account of variations in playing difficulty on any
given competition day by means of a *Computed Buffer Adjustment* (CBA)
which adjusts the buffer zones by between −1 and +2 with provision for
"reductions only" when scoring is especially difficult.[^21] The CBA
replaced the previous [Competition Stableford
Adjustment](Competition_Stableford_Adjustment "wikilink") method, which
adjusted player's Stableford scores directly, in 2013.[^22]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Category</p></th>
<th><p>Handicap index</p></th>
<th><p>Buffer zone<br />
(Stableford points)</p></th>
<th><p>Reduction per point scored<br />
in excess of the buffer zone</p></th>
<th><p>Increase for scores<br />
below the buffer zone</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>≤4.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>35–36</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>2</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>4.5 to 11.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>34–36</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.2</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>3</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>11.5 to 18.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>33–36</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.3</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>18.5 to 26.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>32–36</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.4</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>5</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>26.5 to 36.0</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>31–36</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.5</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>0.1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>6</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>≥37</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>-</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>1.0</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>-</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In addition to playing in qualifying competitions, golfers in Category 2
and above may also submit a number of *extra day scores* in order to
maintain their handicap. Handicaps are also reviewed annually and any
necessary adjustments made.[^23]

### Golf Australia Handicap System

The Golf Australia Handicap System is maintained on GOLF Link, which was
a world-first computerized handicapping system developed by [Golf
Australia](Golf_Australia "wikilink")'s predecessor, the Australian Golf
Union (AGU) in the 1990s. When GOLF Link was first introduced it
contained two key characteristics that set it apart from other world
handicapping systems at the time:

1.  It used a Calculated Course Rating (CCR) to determine how difficult
    the course was on the day, and upon which handicap adjustment was
    made.
2.  It utilized a 'swipe' card that enabled a player to access their
    handicap from any GOLF Link terminal in Australia.

In April 2010 GA adopted the USGA calculation method using the average
of the best 10 differentials of the player's past 20 total rounds,
multiplied by 0.96. In September 2011 this was altered to the best 8 out
of 20 rounds, multiplied by 0.93. The reasons for these changes were
cited to restore equity between high and low handicaps. An ‘anchor' so
that handicaps could not increase by more than 5 in a rolling 12-month
period, [slope ratings](slope_rating "wikilink"), and a more
sophisticated version of CCR called the Daily Scratch Rating (DSR) were
implemented on January 23, 2014.[^24][^25][^26]

#### GA Handicap System overview

The GA Handicap System is based on the
[Stableford](Stableford "wikilink") scoring system, and uses slope and
[course rating](#Course_Rating "wikilink") (called "Scratch Rating").
For handicapping purposes, the scratch rating is adjusted to reflect
scoring conditions ("Daily Scratch Rating"), and all scores are
converted into Stableford points, called the Stableford Handicap
Adjustment (SHA) and inherently applying [net double
bogey](#Maximum_hole_score "wikilink") adjustments, regardless of the
scoring system being used while playing.[^27]

Handicaps are calculated from the best 8 adjusted
[differentials](#Handicap_differential "wikilink"), called "sloped
played to" results, from the most recent 20 scores. Should there be 3 or
more but fewer than 20 scores available, a specified number of "sloped
played to" results are used, per the table below.[^28]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Number of scores</p></th>
<th><p>"Sloped played to"<br />
results to use</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>3 to 6</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>7 or 8</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>9 or 10</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 3</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>11 or 12</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 4</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>13 or 14</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 5</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>15 or 16</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>17 or 18</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 7</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>19 or 20</p></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><p>lowest 8</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

New handicaps require 3 18-hole scores to be submitted (or any
combination of 9 and 18-hole scores totaling 54 holes played) using a
"Temporary Daily Handicap" of 36 for men or 45 for women in order to
calculate the necessary "sloped played to" results. "Sloped played to"
results are calculated using the following formula and rounded to one
decimal place:[^29]

$$\mbox{Sloped played to} = ( \mbox{Par} + \mbox{Daily handicap} - ( \mbox{Stableford points} - \mbox{36} ) - \mbox{Daily scratch rating}) \times \frac{ \mbox{113} }{ \mbox{Slope Rating}}$$

To calculate the GA handicap, the "sloped played to" results are
averaged and multiplied by a factor of 0.93, which is intended to
equalize the handicap in favor of better players. The formula for
calculating a GA handicap is as follows (where *n* is the number of
differentials to use), with the result truncated to one decimal
place:[^30]

$$\mbox{GA handicap} = \frac{0.93}{n}\sum\_{x=1}^{n} \mbox{Sloped played to}\_x$$

The GA handicap is used to create a "[daily
handicap](#Playing_or_course_handicap "wikilink")", specific to the
course and set of tees being used, using the following formula with the
result rounded to the nearest whole number:[^31]

$$\mbox{Daily handicap} = \frac{ \mbox{GA handicap} \times \mbox{Slope Rating} }{ \mbox{113}}$$

### South African Handicap System

Before 2018, the South African Handicap System used a propriety course
rating system without slope, called Standard Rating, which included
specific calculations for length and altitude. Handicaps were calculated
using the best 10 from the last 20 differentials, with differentials
derived by means of a simple (Standard Rating − [Adjusted
Gross](Equitable_Stroke_Control "wikilink")) formula. The system
previously calculated handicaps against an adjusted Standard Rating
(called Calculated Rating) but this was suspended in 2012.[^32] Playing
handicaps were simply the exact handicap, rounded to the nearest whole
number.[^33]

In September 2018, the renamed GolfRSA Handicap System adopted the USGA
Course and Slope Rating system. This necessitated a few additional
changes (e.g. playing handicap and differential calculations), but the
system retained all other features (e.g. Adjusted Gross and no daily
course rating adjustment). The playing handicap under the GolfRSA system
includes the difference between the Course Rating and Par.[^34]

In October 2019, further changes were made which brought the GolfRSA
Handicap System further into line with the upcoming World Handicap
System. The changes introduced included reducing the number of
differentials used in handicap calculations from 10 down to 8, net
double bogey as the maximum score per hole, reducing the minimum number
of valid 18-hole scores required for handicapping to three, and
exceptional scoring reductions.[^35]

### Argentinian Handicap System

The Argentine Golf Association (AAG) handicapping system is a relatively
simple one, using only a course rating, without slope. New handicaps
require the submission of scorecards from five 18-hole rounds (or ten
9-hole rounds). An initial handicap of 25 is normally used as a starting
point, which is then adjusted based on the submitted scores. Handicaps
are updated once every month, with current handicaps generated from a
lookup table using the average of the best eight differentials from the
last 16 rounds. Golfers simply use their exact handicap for playing
purposes.[^36][^37]

### Other systems

For the handicapping of golfers who are ineligible for an official
handicap, some system options are available:

#### Peoria System

The *Peoria System*[^38] was designed for the handicapping of all
players competing in an event such as a *charity* or *corporate* golf
day. Before play commences, the organisers secretly select 6 holes (in
readiness for handicapping purposes later) from the course to be played.
When players have completed their rounds, they apply the *Peoria*
algorithm to their scores on the selected holes to determine their
handicap for that round. They then subtract that handicap from their
gross score to give their net score - and the winner is determined in
the usual way.[^39]

#### Callaway System

The *Callaway System*[^40] was designed with the same objective as
*Peoria*. The *Callaway* handicapping algorithm works by totaling a
variable number of "worst" scores achieved (subject to a double-par
limit) according to a simple table. A couple of adjustments are then
made to this total to give the player's handicap, which is then applied
to their gross score as normal.[^41]

#### Scheid System

The *Scheid System*[^42] is similar to the Callaway System, except a
different version of the table is used.[^43]

#### System 36

*System 36*[^44] is a same-day handicapping system similar in function
to *Callaway System* and *Peoria System*. Throughout the round, the
golfer accrues points based on the following formula:

-   Double bogey or worse: 0 points
-   Bogey: 1 point
-   Par or better: 2 points

At the end of the round, points earned are tallied. The total is
subtracted from 36, and the resulting number is the golfer's handicap
allowance. The golfer's net score can then be computed using their
System 36 handicap allowance.

## References

## External links

-   [World Handicap System](https://www.whs.com/)
-   [World Handicap System – Rules of
    Handicapping](https://www.usga.org/handicapping/roh/2020-rules-of-handicapping.html)
-   [USGA Handicap
    System](https://www.usga.org/content/usga/home-page/handicapping.html)
    (used in the United States and Mexico)
-   [CONGU Unified Handicapping
    System](https://www.congu.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/2019-CONGU-Manual.pdf)
    (used in Great Britain and Ireland)
-   [EGA Handicap System](http://www.ega-golf.ch/page/system-manual)
    (used in continental Europe)
-   [Golf Australia Handicap
    System](https://www.golf.org.au/calculatingahandicap/) (used in
    Australia)
-   [South African Golf Association Handicap
    System](https://www.golfrsa.com/handicaps-pdf/) (used in South
    Africa)

[Category:Golf terminology](Category:Golf_terminology "wikilink")
[Category:Handicapping](Category:Handicapping "wikilink")
[Category:Rules of golf](Category:Rules_of_golf "wikilink")
[^15]: [The Open Championship – More Scottish than
    British](http://www.pgatour.com/2007/travel/07/16/trans_071607/index.html)
    PGA Tour. Retrieved 23 September 2011
