# Measure of a golfer's playing ability

## History

The earliest record of golf handicapping is thought to be from the late
17th century, in a diary kept by [Thomas
Kincaid](Thomas_Kincaid "wikilink"), who was a student in
[Edinburgh](Edinburgh "wikilink"), Scotland, although the word
*handicap* would not come into use in golf until the late 19th century.
The number of strokes to be given and the holes on which they would be
in effect was negotiated between competing golfers prior to the start of
play. According to *The Golfer's Manual* by [Henry Brougham
Farnie](Henry_Brougham_Farnie "wikilink"), examples of agreed terms
included "third-one" (one stroke every three holes), "half-one" (one
stroke every two holes), "one more" (a stroke a hole) and "two more"
(two strokes a hole).[^1][^2]

During the late 19th century, taking the difference between the average
of a golfer's best three scores during the year and
[par](Par_(golf) "wikilink") became the most widely used method of
handicapping in England and Scotland. As the sport grew, so did
discontent with the fairness of handicapping, with less proficient
players being particularly unhappy as it was much less likely for them
to play to the standard of their three-score average. Another issue was
the lack of consideration in the system for the varying difficulties of
different courses which meant the handicap was not very portable.[^3]

In an attempt to remedy the problems with a fairly basic handicap
system, along with many variations of that system and other systems also
being used, the authorities in Great Britain and Ireland sought to
standardize. One of the first standard and equitable handicap systems
was introduced by the [Ladies Golf Union](Ladies_Golf_Union "wikilink")
(LGU) in the 1890s. This was largely achieved by means of union-assigned
[course ratings](#Course_Rating "wikilink"), instead of clubs using
their own. It was not until the formation of the British Golf Unions
Joint Advisory Committee in 1924 that the men's game fully coordinated
to create an equitable handicap system, that included a uniform course
rating, throughout Great Britain and Ireland; the *Standard Scratch
Score and Handicapping Scheme* was introduced in 1926.[^4][^5]

In the United States there was a single authority governing the sport,
the [USGA](USGA "wikilink"), which made moving to a single standard
handicapping scheme somewhat easier. Introduced in 1911, the first
national handicap system was based on the British three-score average
system. The biggest development was a "par rating" system that assessed
the average good score of a scratch golfer on every course, which made
the handicap more portable. It also made clear that a player's handicap
was intended to reflect their potential rather than average play. Having
initially allowed clubs to determine their own par ratings, the USGA
quickly changed their minds and began assigning ratings. The USGA
Handicap System has further developed through the years, with an
increase in the number of scores used for handicap calculations, the
introduction of [Equitable Stroke
Control](Equitable_Stroke_Control "wikilink"),[^6] and improvements to
the course rating system. However the most significant change was the
creation of the [slope rating](slope_rating "wikilink") system, which
enables handicaps to allow for differences in difficulty between scratch
and bogey golfers. USGA Course and Slope Ratings now form the basis of
many other handicap systems.[^7]

As the sport grew globally, associations around the world each created
or adapted their own rules relating to handicaps. By the early 21st
century, there were six major recognized handicapping systems in
operation around the world: USGA Handicap System, EGA Handicap System,
CONGU Unified Handicap System, Golf Australia Handicap System, South
African Handicap System, and Argentinian Handicap System. While these
systems share some common features, e.g. most use a common course rating
system, they are not easily portable because their differences create
difficulties in converting handicaps between systems. In order to
eliminate these problems the USGA and The R&A, working with the various
existing handicapping authorities, devised a new *World Handicap System*
which was phased in globally in 2020.[^8][^9]

## Overview

[Amateur golfers](Amateur_golf "wikilink") who are members of golf clubs
are generally eligible for official handicaps on payment of the
prevailing regional and national association annual fees. Official
handicaps are administered by [golf
clubs](golf_club_(institution) "wikilink") with the associations often
providing additional peer reviewing for low handicaps. Other systems,
often free of charge, are available to golfers who are ineligible for
official handicaps. Handicap systems are not generally used in
[professional golf](Professional_golf_tours "wikilink"). A golfer whose
handicap is zero is referred to as a **scratch golfer**, and one whose
handicap is approximately 18 as a **bogey golfer**.[^10]

While the USGA administers its own handicapping system, the
administration of handicapping systems in countries affiliated to The
R&A is the responsibility of the national golf associations of those
countries. These bodies have different methods of producing handicaps
but they are all generally based on calculating an individual player's
playing ability from their recent history of rounds. Therefore, a
handicap is not fixed but is regularly adjusted to increases or
decreases in a player's scoring. Some systems (e.g. World Handicap
System, USGA, European Golf Association) involve calculation of a
playing handicap which is dependent on the
[course](golf_course "wikilink") being played and set of
[tees](teeing_ground "wikilink") that are being used, whereas others
(e.g. CONGU's Unified Handicap System) just use the allocated handicap
rounded to the nearest whole number.

Contrary to popular opinion, a player's handicap is intended to reflect
a player's potential or "average best", not a player's overall average
score. Statistically, low handicappers will play to their handicap more
often because they are likely to be more consistent than higher
handicappers.

## Features of handicapping systems

### Scoring

The total number of strokes taken for a hole (or round) before
accounting for a golfer's handicap is called the *gross score* for that
hole (or round), and the number of strokes taken after subtracting any
handicap allowance is called the *net score*.[^11]

Note that the *gross score* in 'world handicap system' is calculated as
the number of strokes taken for a hole ***+ the handicap allowance for
that hole*.** The *adjusted gross score* in 'world handicap system' is
the *gross score* adjusted such that the maximum on any particular hole
is the number of strokes taken for a hole + the handicap allowance for
that hole + 2 strokes (i.e. net double bogey).

In handicap [stroke play](stroke_play "wikilink") competitions, a
golfer's [playing handicap](#Playing_or_course_handicap "wikilink") is
subtracted from the total number of strokes taken to produce a net
score, which is then used to determine the final results. In handicap
[Stableford](Stableford "wikilink") competitions, a player's handicap is
distributed according to predetermined hole ratings ([stroke
index](stroke_index "wikilink")) and strokes deducted accordingly from
each hole score before calculating the points for that hole. In [match
play](match_play "wikilink"), the handicap difference between players
(or teams) is used to determine the number of strokes the high handicap
player should receive from the low handicapper during the playing of
their round; each of these strokes are received on the lowest numbered
stroke index holes.[^12] Stroke allowances may sometimes be reduced by a
set percentage in order to maintain the level playing field; this is
especially common in pairs and team competitions.
](https://github.com/makusvankempen/taxonomy/blob/main/knowledge/sports/golf/handicap.yaml)
